Lying For Jesus

Duane Gish, InterVarsity, and Creationism at Rutgers

by Richard Trott


	There exists in the United States a small but vocal group of people
who call themselves "scientific creationists."  These people claim that
evolution is not science, but religion, and that the empirical evidence of
the world does not support it.  "Scientific" creationists believe that the
teaching of evolution in public schools is the teaching of a religious dogma
and that equal time should be given to the "theory" of creationism which
apparently states, among other things, that the world is only several
thousand years old and that humans have coexisted in the past with all
currently extinct species.  As we shall see, to maintain such an absurd view,
"scientific" creationists need to alter many facts, omit many others, and use
rather tortured logic.  Unfortunately, largely due to its origin within
hyperliteralist Christian circles, "scientific" creationism has experienced
moderate political success in some communities.  
	On Monday, March 21, 1994, over 100 people came to hear Dr. Duane T.
Gish speak at Hill Center on the Busch Campus.  The lecture was sponsored by
Rutgers InterVarsity Chinese Christian Fellowship.  Gish is the vice
president of the Institute for Creation Research and was touted in fliers for
the event as "one of the world's leading experts on Scientific Creationism." 
The oxymoron "scientific creationism" aside, if Gish is "one of the world's
leading experts," evolutionary scientists have nothing to fear from science. 
Unfortunately, they have a lot to fear from the overly credulous vicitims of
pseudoscientific sophistry.  None of Gish's supporters that evening seemed to
notice the numerous times he contradicted himself by changing his position on
a subject when it suited the needs of his argument.  For example, early on in
the lecture, Gish stated that neither evolution nor creationism is scientific
since, among other things, neither is falsifiable.  Gish then spent the
remainder of his lecture attempting to falsify evolution.  Furthermore, he
later stated emphatically that creationism is a scientific explanation, even
though, as noted above, he earlier said that creationism was not scientific.
	Gish preached falsehoods about the fossil record.  For example, Gish
stated that there are no fossil precursors to the dinosaur Triceratops.  Gish
has been telling this myth for at least 12 years now.  However, it is
absolutely untrue.  Ceratopsian precursors of Triceratops include, for
example, Monoclonius and Protoceratops.  This lineage appears in proper
sequence in the fossil record.  It shows the expected developmental change in
body size, size of the bony frill, and number of horns.  Unfortunately, it is
likely that none of Gish's audience was aware that his statement was
completely contrary to fact.  Gish promulgated similar falsehoods about the
fossil record all night long.  
	 Gish also played subtle terminology games.  He emphasized that there
were no "transitional forms" in the fossil record but he did not explain what
characteristics he would accept as "transitional" (with the exception of a
ludicrous gloss on what one would expect to see in the horns of Triceratops).
 In the past, Gish has, for example, declared that the reptile-bird
transition Archaeopteryx was not a transition because it had feathers and flew
and was, therefore, a bird.  To make the absurd assertion that Archaeopteryx
did not show features of a reptile, Gish must conceal from his audience
facts about Archaeopteryx such as that it possessed a pubic peduncle and a
long bony tail.  These are features found in reptiles that are never found in
birds.
	Gish showed either incredible ignorance or a stunning lack of
integrity when he stated that Lord Solly Zuckerman, writing in 1970 that 
Australopithecus was probably not an ancestor of Homo sapiens, had more or
less all the evidence that we have today.  The field of physical anthropology
underwent a revolution in the 1970s due to new discoveries and Gish's claim
is patently ridiculous.  Gish also told his audience that Neanderthals are
now accepted as "fully human Homo sapiens just like you and me."  Of course,
Neanderthals were not "just like you and me".  A Neanderthal had a longer and
lower skull, a larger face and larger teeth, no chin, and a massive brow
ridge in front of a differently shaped brain, as well as a distinctive
skeletal structure.
	One statement of Gish's was particularly laughable.  He mentioned in
an offhand manner that evolutionists "predicted" life on Mars.  In other
words, since there is no life on Mars, that's another strike against
evolution.  This is a truly remarkable grasp for straws.
	Gish claimed that anti-creationist books "don't say a word" about the
origin of fishes.  I found this assertion peculiar, so I looked in the best
anti-creationist book available.  Allow me to highly recommend Arthur N.
Strahler's Science and Earth History to anyone interested in all the
information that Gish likes to pretend doesn't exist.  Glancing through the
table of contents, I found "Chapter 42. . . Invertebrates to Vertebrates." 
Flipping to the appropriate page, there was a section on the evidence for
evolution from invertebrates to jawless fishes.  Before that, there was also
a section on precursors to Cambrian metazoans, which Gish also told his
audience did not exist.
	Lest anyone think this was a simple case of a crackpot outsider
coming to Rutgers for a one-shot lecture of ludicrous assertions, allow me to
point out that Rutgers InterVarsity seems to have actively participated in
this campaign of misinformation.  Before the lecture, a pamphlet was
distributed to the audience.  The pamphlet appears to be untitled and there
is no apparent author listed.  However, "Rutgers InterVarsity Chinese
Christian Fellowship" does appear on the pamphlet and I will assume that they
are at least indirectly responsible for the distribution of the pamphlet.  
	The pamphlet is a classic pastiche of selective quotations and
creationist nonsense.  For example, the pamphlet states, "The Second Law of
Thermodynamics states that there is a general tendency of all observed
systems to go from order to disorder. . . A fundamental law of physics says
that natural systems go from order to disorder; evolutionists say that these
same systems will go from disorder to order."  This is, of course, complete
nonsense.  Among other problems with this argument, the Second Law of
Thermodynamics only applies to systems that are isolated and in thermal
equilibrium.  Living systems are not isolated systems in thermal equilibrium.
 Therefore, the systems that an evolutionary scientist talks about are not
the same systems that the Second Law of Thermodynamics talks about. The
author sums up with the outrageous claim that the "evolutionary hypothesis. .
. contradicts one of the most well-established laws of science (the Second
Law of Thermodynamics)."  The fact that the pamphlet's creationist author
knows nothing about thermodynamics doesn't keep him from trying to use it as
evidence for the cause of creationism. 	
	Christians are commanded not to bear false witness.  InterVarsity
should be ashamed for perpetrating this intellectual fraud on the Rutgers
community.

