BriefClaim: There are flood myths from all over the world.
Title: Widespread flood myths
Keywords: flood, myth, legend, global.

Claim:

Many cultures around the world have flood myths, indicating the
universality of the Flood.

Source:

LaHaye, Tim, and John Morris, 1976. _The Ark on Ararat_.  Nashville:
 Thomas Nelson Inc., pp. 231-241.
Brown, Walt, 1995.  _In the Beginning: Compelling evidence for creation
 and the Flood_.  Phoenix, AZ: Center for Scientific Creation, p. 35.

Response:

1. Flood myths are widespread, but they are not all the same myth.  They
   differ in many important aspects, including
    - reasons for the flood.  (Most do not give a reason.)
    - who survived.  (Almost none have only a family of eight surviving.)
    - what they took with them.  (Very few saved samples of all life.)
    - how they survived.  (In about half the myths, people escaped to high
      ground; some flood myths have no survivors.)
    - what they did afterwards.  (Few feature any kind of sacrifice
      after the flood.)

   If the world's flood myths arose from a common source, then we would
   expect evidence of common descent.  An analysis of their similarities
   and differences should show either a branching tree such as the
   evolutionary tree of life, or, if the original biblical myth was
   preserved unchanged, the differences should be greater the further one
   gets from Babylon.  Neither pattern matches the evidence.  Flood myths
   are best explained by repeated independent origins with some local
   spread and some spread by missionaries.  The biblical flood myth in
   particular has close parallels only to other myths from the same
   region, with which it probably shares a common source, and to versions
   spread to other cultures by missionaries (Isaak 2002).

2. Flood myths are likely common because floods are common; the commonness
   of the myth in no way implies a global flood.  Myths about snakes are
   even more common than myths about floods, but that does not mean there
   was once one snake surrounding the entire earth.

Links:

References:

1. Isaak, Mark, 2002.  Flood stories from around the world. 
   http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/flood-myths.html

Further Reading:

Dundes, Alan (ed.), 1988.  _The Flood Myth_.  Berkeley: University of
 California Press.

Date: 2001-2-18, 2005-5-25
