BriefClaim: Zircons retain too much helium for an old earth.
Title: Helium diffusion from zircons
Keywords: helium, uranium, zircon, diffusion, radiometric decay, RATE group.

Claim:

Uranium and thorium in zircons produce helium as a by-product of their
radioactive decay.  This helium seeps out of the the zircons quickly over
a wide range of temperatures.  If the zircons really are about 1.5 billion
years old (the age that conventional dating gives assuming a constant
decay rate), almost all of the helium should have dissipated from the
zircons long ago.  But there is a significant amount of helium still
inside the zircons, showing their ages to be 6,000 +/- 2,000 years.
Accelerated decay must have produced a billion years worth of helium in
that short amount of time.

Source:

Humphreys, D. Russell, Steven A. Austin, John R. Baumgardner, and Andrew
 A. Snelling, 2003.  Helium diffusion rates support accelerated nuclear
 decay.
 https://web.archive.org/web/20051224074107if_/http://www.icr.org/pdf/research/Helium_ICC_7-22-03.pdf
Humphreys, D. Russell, Steven A. Austin, John R. Baumgardner and A. A.
 Snelling, 2004.  Helium diffusion age of 6,000 years supports accelerated
 nuclear decay.  _Creation Research Society Quarterly_ 41(1): 1-16.
 https://web.archive.org/web/20160202213942if_/http://www.creationresearch.org/crsq/articles/41/41_1/Helium.htm
#Wieland, Carl, 2003.  RATE group reveals exciting breakthroughs!
# http://www.answersingenesis.org/docs2003/0821rate.asp

Response:

1. Subsurface pressure and temperature conditions affect how quickly the
   helium diffuses out of zircons.  D. R. Humphreys et al. selected a rock
   core sample from the Fenton Hill site, which Los Alamos National
   Laboratory evaluated in the 1970s for geothermal energy production.
   The area is within a few kilometers of the Valles Caldera, which has
   gone through several periods of faulting and volcanism.  The rocks of
   the Fenton Hill core have been fractured, brecciated, and intruded by
   hydrothermal veins.  Excess helium is present in the rocks of the
   Valles Caldera (Goff and Gardner 1994).  The helium may have
   contaminated the gneiss that Humphreys et al. studied.  In short, the
   entire region has had a very complex thermal history.  Based on oil
   industry experience, it is essentially impossible to make accurate
   statements about the helium-diffusion history of such a system.

2. Scientific studies, especially those with radical implications, do not
   mean much until the results have been replicated by others.  Many
   scientific claims have disappeared entirely when others could not get
   the same results.  Confidence in this particular paper is reduced by
   certain points:
    - Most measurement errors and variabilities are not reported.
      Therefore, we do not know how accurate the results are.
    - Humphreys et al. claimed that they studied zircons and biotites from
      depths of 750 and 1,490 meters in the Jemez Granodiorite.  However,
      Sasada (1989) showed that at those depths, the samples came from a
      gneiss, an entirely different rock type.
    - Because of math errors, the Q/Q<sub>0</sub> values (fraction of
      helium retained), used by Humphreys et al. to derive their dates,
      are too high.
    - Humphreys et al. (2003) failed properly to total their data in
      Appendix C, which means that they grossly underestimated the total
      amount of helium released by their 750-meter-deep zircons.  The
      amount of helium in the zircons greatly exceeds the amount that
      would be expected from the radioactive decay of uranium over 1.5
      billion years.  The high helium concentration may be due to samples
      that were abnormally high in uranium and/or to the presence of
      excess helium.
    - Much is made of the fact that samples five and six retained the same
      amount of helium, even though the amounts are probably at the limit
      of what could be measured.  The possibility of measurement error
      accounting for the results is never mentioned.
    - If one discounts sample five, which is likely at the limit of
      measurable precision, the conclusions of Humphreys et al. (2004)
      rest on just three samples.  Such a small data set may be the basis
      for further research, but not for drawing firm conclusions.
    - Humphreys et al. (2003, note 9) referred to correcting "apparent
      typographical errors" in the raw data, casting suspicion on
      the validity of all the data.

   The helium results could easily be due to an aberrant sample.  They
   could be an artifact of the experimental or collecting method (e.g.,
   defects in the zircons caused by rapid cooling) or from just plain
   sloppiness.  We cannot know for sure until others have looked at the
   issue, too.

3. Producing a billion years of radioactive decay in a "Creation week" or
   year-long flood would have produced a billion years worth of heat from
   radioactive decay as well.  This would pretty much vaporize the earth.
   Since the earth apparently has not been vaporized recently, we can be
   confident that the accelerated decay did not occur.  (Humphreys
   recognizes this "heat problem" but is currently unable to provide a
   solution.)

4. If helium concentrations stay high around the rocks, it is possible for
   helium to diffuse into voids and fractures in the zircons, or at least
   high helium pressures could reduce the rate at which helium diffuses
   out.  Either of these scenarios would invalidate the helium diffusion
   calculations in Humphreys et al. (2003, 2004).  Helium concentrations
   within the earth become high enough for commercial mining.  The sample
   measured by Humphreys et al. came from an area that is probably helium
   enriched.  Helium deposits are common in New Mexico, and excess helium
   has been found just a few miles from where the sample was taken (Goff
   and Gardner 1994).  To test for the presence of excess helium in their
   zircons, Humphreys et al. should look for <sup>3</sup>He.

5. Uranium does not decay directly to lead; rather, it proceeds through
   a series of multiple intermediate radioactive elements (Faure 1986,
   284-287).  It takes about ten half-lives of the longest lived
   intermediate to achieve secular equilibrium (i.e., each intermediate
   having the same activity).  The uranium decay series contains elements
   with half-lives well over 10,000 years.  If the decay rates changed
   suddenly, we would not expect the various elements to be in a secular
   equilibrium.  Humphreys et al. should test for this in their zircons.
   Other uranium ores are at secular equilibrium, indicating a constant
   decay rate for at least the last two million years.

Links:

Henke, Kevin R. 2005.  Young-earth creationist helium diffusion "dates":
 Fallacies based on bad assumptions and questionable data.
 http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/helium/zircons.html

References:

1. Faure, G., 1986.  _Principles of Isotope Geology_, 2nd ed.  New York:
   Wiley.
2. Goff, F. and J. N. Gardner, 1994.  Evolution of a mineralized
   geothermal system, Valles Caldera, New Mexico.  _Economic Geology_ 89:
   1803-1832.
3. Sasada, M., 1989.  Fluid inclusion evidence for recent temperature
   increases at Fenton Hill Hot Dry Rock Test Site west of the Valles
   Caldera, New Mexico, U.S.A.  _Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal
   Research_ 36: 257-266.

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-8-23, 2005-3-18
