BriefClaim: Isochron dating gives unreliable results.
Title: Isochron reliability
Keywords: isochron, radiometric dating, isotope, young earth

Claim:

Isochron dating is unreliable.  The method assumes that the samples are
cogenetic, that is, that they form at the same time from a reasonably
homogeneous common pool.  This assumption is invalid.  In particular,
mixing two sources with different isotopic compositions gives meaningless
but apparently valid isochron plots.

Source:

Overn, William, n.d.  Isochron rock dating is fatally flawed.
 https://web.archive.org/web/20220105141521if_/http://www.tccsa.tc/articles/isochrons2.html

Response:

1. Mixing can usually be detected by plotting the total daughter
   isotopes against the ratio of daughter isotopes.  These would not
   likely fall on a straight line if mixing occurred.

2. Isochron plots from mixing can have any slope, even negative slopes.
   If mixing were common, we would expect a high percentage of isochron
   results to show negative slopes.  They do not.

3. Other factors can produce false isochrons (Stassen 1998; Zheng 1989).
   For example:
    - Protracted fractionation.  This requires slow cooling (over millions
      of years) and produces only a small error.
    - Inherited ages as from partial melting.  The age given by this
      method is the age of the source material.  Furthermore, this factor
      requires unusual conditions and usually produces scatter in the
      isochron plot.
    - Metamorphosism.  This produces apparent ages younger than the age
      of the source material.
  

4. False isochrons can usually be avoided by choosing appropriate samples.
   The samples must come from an (apparently) initially homogeneous source
   and avoiding obvious signs of weathering and metamorphism.

Links:

Stassen, Chris, 1998.  Isochron dating.
 http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/isochron-dating.html

References:

1. Stassen, C., 1998.  (see above)
2. Zheng, Y.-F., 1989. Influences of the nature of the initial Rb-Sr
   system on isochron validity. In _Chemical Geology (Isotope Geoscience
   Section)_ 80, pp. 1-16.

Further Reading:

Dalrymple, G. Brent, 1991.  _The Age of the Earth_.  Stanford, CA:
 Stanford University Press

Faure, Gunter, 1986.  _Principles of Isotope Geology_, 2nd ed.  New
 York: John Wiley and Sons.

Date: 2003-8-4
