BriefClaim: Consistency of radiometric dating comes from selective reporting.
Title: Selective reporting of dating results
Keywords: radiometric dating, bias

Claim:

The use of radiometric dating in geology involves a very selective
acceptance of data.  Most discrepant dates are not published.  This
selective reporting may account for consistencies in the data; internal
consistencies, mineral-pair concordances, and agreement between differing
dating methods may be illusory.

Source:

Woodmorappe, John, 1979.  Radiometric geochronology reappraised. CRSQ
 16(2): 102-129.
Woodmorappe, John. 1999.  _The Mythology of Modern Dating Methods_.
 El Cajon, CA: ICR.

Response:

1. Geologists cannot be selective about choosing results because
   measurements typically cost hundreds of dollars per sample.  To date
   multiple samples and choose a concordant set from among them would
   require throwing out about $100,000 worth of data if dating methods
   gave chance results (Henke n.d.).

2. As creationists are fond of pointing out, radiometric dating is
   complicated by geological processes such as metamorphism and
   weathering, which can interfere with the assumptions that the dating
   methods use.  As creationists do not point out, though, geologists know
   this.  They examine the geological context of where their samples came
   from to determine whether a technique is likely to be valid, and they
   experiment with different techniques on different minerals subjected
   to different conditions to determine which combinations of techniques,
   minerals, and conditions are valid and which are not.  Many so-called
   discordant dates are results from such experiments dishonestly
   portrayed as ordinary field measurements.

   All measurement techniques, from rulers to neutrino detectors, are
   invalid in some contexts.  That does not make them invalid in all
   contexts.  Woodmorappe and others who cite discordant radiometric dates
   are claiming that the method is entirely useless because it does not
   apply to some contexts.

3. The factors that one must consider when doing radiometric dating were
   ignored by Woodmorappe.  He ignored geological context and well-known
   limitations of dating methods.  His analysis is further flawed because
    - he uses obsolete data, such as data from years when the technique
      was still being developed.
    - his treatment of individual cases is extremely superficial.
    - his paper is written as propaganda, not as a technical analysis.  If
      he believes what he writes, he should publish it in journals for
      professional geologists, not for creationists.

Links:

Schimmrich, Steven H., 1998.  Geochronology _kata_ John Woodmorappe.
 http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/woodmorappe-geochronology.html

References:

1. Henke, Kevin R., n.d.  How can Woodmorappe sell us a bill of goods if he
   doesn't know the costs?
   http://noanswersingenesis.org.au/woodmorappe_bill_of_goods_henke.htm

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-8-2, 2004-9-8
