BriefClaim: Uniformitarian assumption is untenable.
Title: Uniformitarianism
Keywords: geology

Claim:

The evolution model is associated primarily with uniformitarianism, but
evidence of catastrophism makes the uniformitarian assumption untenable.

Source:

SciCre, pp. 91-100.

Response:

1. Modern uniformitarianism (actualism) differs from nineteenth century
   Lyell uniformitarianism.  The prevailing view in the eighteenth and
   early nineteenth centuries was that the earth had been created by
   supernatural means and had been shaped by several catastrophes, such as
   worldwide floods.  In 1785, James Hutton published the proposal that
   Earth's history could be explained in terms of processes observed in
   the present; that is, "the present is key to the past."  This was the
   beginning of uniformitarianism.  Charles Lyell, in his _Principles of
   Geology_, modified Hutton's ideas and applied this philosophy to
   explain geological features in terms of relatively gradual everyday
   processes.

   Geologists today no longer subscribe to Lyell uniformitarianism.
   Starting in the late ninteenth century, fieldwork showed that natural
   catastrophes still have a role in creating the geologic record.  For
   example, in the later twentieth century, J. Harlan Bretz showed that the
   Scablands in eastern Washington formed from a large flood when a
   glacial lake broke through an ice dam; and Luis Alvarez proposed that
   an asteroid impact was responsible for the extinction of dinosaurs 65
   million years ago.  Actualism (modern uniformitarianism) states that
   the geologic record is the product of both slow, gradual processes
   (such as glacial erosion) and natural catastrophes (such as volcanic
   eruptions and landslides).  However, natural catastrophes are not
   consistent with creationist catastrophism, such as "Flood geology."
   First, they are much smaller than the world-shaping events proposed as
   part of the creationists' catastrophism.  More to the point, they still
   represent processes observed in the present.  Meteorites, glacial
   melting, and flash floods still occur regularly, and we can (and do, as
   in the examples above) extrapolate from the observed occurrences to
   larger events of the same sort.  The scale of events may change, but
   the physical laws operating today are key to the past.

Links:

University of Oregon. n.d.  Uniformitarianism.
 https://web.archive.org/web/20041014183458if_/http://zebu.uoregon.edu/2003/glossary/uniformitarianism.html

References:

Further Reading:

Lyell, Charles, 1830.  _Principles of Geology_.  London: John Murray.
 http://www.esp.org/books/lyell/principles/facsimile/title3.html

Date: 2003-8-16, 2004-9-9
