BriefClaim: Evaporites could form without evaporation.
Title: Evaporites without evaporation
Keywords: evaporite

Claim:

Evaporites can precipitate from unsaturated brines; they can form without
evaporation (H. M. Morris 1974).  A mechanism is sketched by J. D. Morris
(2002):

 "Many now think the salt was extruded in superheated, supersaturated salt
  brines from deep in the earth along faults. Once encountering the cold
  ocean waters, the hot brines could no longer sustain the high
  concentrations of salt, which rapidly precipitated out of solution, free
  of impurities and marine organisms.

Source:

SciCre, pp.
 105-106.
Morris, John D., 2002.  Does salt come from evaporated sea water?
 _Acts & Facts_ 31(11) (Nov.).
 http://www.icr.org/index.php?module=articles&action=view&ID=532

Response:

1. Most evaporite deposits are not associated with evidence of
   hydrothermal activity.  The huge amount of energy needed to deposit
   kilometers of salt in a few weeks should have left obvious evidence,
   such as heat-altered rocks or evidence of magma.  Typical hydrothermal
   deposits such as iron and manganese are not often found associated with
   evaporites.  Sea-floor basalts are a common site of hydrothermal
   activity, and other hydrothermal deposits are found there, but salt
   deposits are never found associated with them.

2. Hydrothermal systems operating today are not depositing any salt, much
   less the thick, laterally extensive layers we find in the sedimentary
   record.  In fact, hydrothermal solutions contain less sodium and
   chlorine than normal sea water (Open University Team 1989, 100).

3. Evaporites are observed forming today in basins with no significant
   outflow; the water that flows in evaporates and leaves behind layers of
   dissolved salts.  Ancient evaporites are also found in sedimentary
   context, and they are often associated with other evidence of being
   open to the air, such as footprints, dessication cracks and occasional
   raindrop impressions.  None of these structures are consistent with an
   underwater hydrothermal environment.

   Evaporites are also found in sabkha environments, where crystals or
   nodules of salt grow within fine-grained sediments as saline
   groundwater (usually from a nearby ocean) is drawn upward by
   evaporation.  As the water evaporates at the surface, salt nodules
   grow, often forming a chicken-wire pattern.  Some sabkha evaporites
   grow into gypsum rosettes, huge crystals resembling flowers.  These
   features also are known from ancient evaporites.  They also are
   inconsistent with hydrothermal deposition.

Links:

References:

1. Open University Team, 1989.  _The Ocean Basins: Their Structure and
   Evolution_.  Oxford: Pergamon.

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-5-31, 2004-4-3
