BriefClaim: Evolution is racist.
Title: Evolution and racism
Keywords: racism, race.

Claim:

Evolution promotes racism.

Source:

SciCre, p. 179.

Response:

1. When properly understood, evolution refutes racism.  Before Darwin, people
   used typological thinking for living things, considering different
   plants and animals to be their distinct "kinds."  This gave rise to a
   misleading conception of human races, in which different races are
   thought of as separate and distinct.  Darwinism helps eliminate
   typological thinking and with it the basis for racism.

2. Genetic studies show that humans are remarkably homogeneous
   genetically, so all humans are only one biological race.  Evolution
   does not teach racism; it teaches the very opposite.

3. Racism is thousands of years older than the theory of evolution, and
   its prevalence has probably decreased since Darwin's day; certainly
   slavery is much less now.  That is the opposite of what we would expect
   if evolution promotes racism.

4. <CA005.1>Darwin himself> was far less racist than most of his
   contemporaries.

5. Although creationism is not inherently racist, it is based upon and
   inseparable from religious bigotry, and religious bigotry is no less
   hateful and harmful than racism.

6. Racism historically has been closely associated with creationism (Moore
   2004), as is evident in the following examples:

   - George McCready Price, who is to young-earth creationism what Darwin
     is to evolution, was much more racist than Darwin.  He wrote,

       "The poor little fellow who went to the south<br />
        &nbsp;&nbsp;Got lost in the forests dank;<br />
        His skin grew black, as the fierce sun beat<br />
        And scorched his hair with its tropic heat,<br />
        &nbsp;&nbsp;And his mind became a blank.

     In _The Phantom of Organic Evolution_, he referred to Negroes and
     Mongolians as degenerate humans (Numbers 1992, 85).

   - During much of the long history of apartheid in South Africa,
     evolution was not allowed to be taught.  The Christian National
     Education system, formalized in 1948 and accepted as national policy
     from 1967 to 1993, stated, among other things,

       "that white children should 'receive a separate education from
        black children to prepare them for their respective superior and
        inferior positions in South African social and economic life, and
        all education should be based on Christian National principles'
        (Esterhuysen and Smith 1998).

     The policy excluded the concept of evolution, taught a version of
     history that negatively characterized non-whites, and made Bible
     education, including the teaching of creationism, and religious
     assemblies compulsory (Esterhuysen and Smith 1998).

   - The Bible Belt in the southern United States
     fought hardest to maintain slavery.

   - Henry Morris, of the Institute for Creation Research, has in the past
     read racism into his interpretation of the Bible:

       "Sometimes the Hamites, especially the Negroes, have even become
        actual slaves to the others.  Possessed of a genetic character
        concerned mainly with mundane, practical matters, they have often
        eventually been displaced by the intellectual and philosophical
        acumen of the Japhethites and the religious zeal of the Semites
        (Morris 1976, 241).

7. None of this matters to the science of evolution.

Links:

Trott, Richard and Jim Lippard, 2003. Creationism implies racism?
 http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/racism.html

References:

1. Esterhuysen, Amanda and Jeannette Smith, 1998.  Evolution: 'the
   forbidden word'?  _South African Archaeological Bulletin_ 53: 135-137.
   Quoted from Stear, J., 2004. It's official! Racism is an integral part
   of creationist dogma.
   http://noanswersingenesis.org.au/aig_and_racism_response.htm
2. Moore, R., 2004.  (see below)
2. Morris, Henry M., 1976.  _The Genesis Record: A Scientific and
   Devotional Commentary on the Book of Beginnings_.  San Diego:
   Creation-Life Publishers.
3. Numbers, Ronald L., 1992, _The Creationists_, New York: Knopf.

Further Reading:

Mayr, Ernst, 2000.  Darwin's influence on modern thought.  SciAm
 283(1) (Jul.): 78-83.

Moore, Randy, 2004.  The dark side of creationism.  _The American Biology
 Teacher_ 66(2): 85-87.

Date: 2001-4-29, 2006-9-6
