BriefClaim: Evolution leads to social Darwinism.
Title: Social Darwinism. 
Keywords: social Darwinism

Claim:

Darwinism leads to social Darwinism, the policy that the weak should be
allowed to fail and die.

Source:

SciCre, p. 179.

Response:

1. This is an example of the <CA002>naturalistic fallacy> -- the argument
   that how things are implies how they ought to be.  But "is" does not
   imply "ought."  Evolution only tells how things are; it does not say
   how they should be.

2. The source of social Darwinism was not Darwin but Herbert Spencer and
   the tradition of Protestant nonconformism going back to Hobbes via
   Malthus.  Spencer's ideas of evolution were Lamarckian.  The only real
   connection between Darwinism and social Darwinism is the name.

3. Diverse political and religious ideas draw upon evolutionary biology,
   including ideas advocating greater cooperation.

4. Evolutionary theory shows us that the long-term survival of a species
   is strongly linked with its genetic variability.  All Social
   Darwinist programs advocate minimizing genetic variability, thus
   reducing chances of long-term survival in the event of environmental
   change.  An understanding of evolution should then rebuke any attempt at
   social Darwinism if the long-term survival of humanity is treated as
   a goal.

5. Eugenics and social Darwinian accounts are more often tied  
   to the rise of the science of genetics than to evolutionary theory.

Links:

Wilkins, John, 1997. Evolution and philosophy: Does evolution make might
 right?  http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/evolphil/social.html

References:

Further Reading:

Bannister, R. C., 1979.  _Social Darwinism: Science and Myth in
 Anglo-American Social Thought_. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
        
Bowler, P. J., 1993.  Biology and Social Thought, 1850-1914.  _Berkeley
 papers in history of science_; 15. Berkeley, Calif., Office for History
 of Science and Technology University of California at Berkeley: 95.
        
Hofstadter, R., 1944.  _Social Darwinism in American Thought_.
 Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
        
Kevles, D., 1995.  _In the Name of Eugenics: Genetics and the Uses of
 Human Heredity_. New York: Knopf.

Ruse, Michael, 2001.  Social Darwinism.  Chapter 10 in: _Can a Darwinian
 Be a Christian?_, Cambridge University Press.
        
Singer, P., 2000.  _A Darwinian Left: Politics, Evolution, and
 Cooperation_.  New Haven: Yale University Press.

Date: 2003-4-21, 2003-9-26
