BriefClaim: Homosexuality receives approval from evolutionists.
Title: Homosexuality and evolution
Keywords: homosexuality, immorality

Claim:

Homosexuality is considered acceptable and even desirable by most
evolutionists, who point out that homosexuality is common in many
species.

Source:

Morris, Henry M. 2000.  Evil-ution.  _Back to Genesis_ 140 (Aug.): a-c.


Response:

1. The acceptance of homosexuality has nothing to do with evolution.  It
   comes from the recognition that homosexuals, like all people, deserve
   real love, not just lip service about love.  Evolutionists (and other
   non-fundamentalists), including many people who believe the Bible just
   as much as Creationists do, are not constrained by the narrow
   interpretations of the people in certain rigid religions, which are the
   only sources why homosexuality might be considered immoral.

   Contrary to Morris' assertion, evolutionists don't consider
   homosexuality desirable.

2. The pervasiveness of homosexuality throughout nature shows, beyond
   question, that homosexuality is natural (Bagemihl 1998), belying the
   only non-religious justification for hatred of homosexuality.

3. The Biblical objection to homosexuality is hypocritical, because those
   who condemn it do not condemn just as vigorously other prohibited
   behaviors such as wearing clothing made of two kinds of material
   (Lev. 19: 19), trimming or shaving sideburns (Lev. 19: 27), getting
   tattoos (Lev. 19: 28), and charging interest (Deut. 23: 19-20).  People
   who condemn homosexuality do so not because the Bible tells them to,
   but, ultimately, because they want to.  People who condemn others
   should first examine the morality of their own judgments.

Links:

References:

1. Bagemihl, Bruce. 1998.  _Biological Exuberance: Animal Homosexuality
   and Natural Diversity_.  New York: St. Martin Press.

Further Reading:

Judson, Olivia. 2002. _Dr. Tatiana's Sex Advice to All Creation_,
  New York: Metropolitan Books.

Date: 2001-2-18, 2003-9-26
