BriefClaim: Evolutionists are intellectual snobs.
Title: Snobbery
Keywords: ivory tower, elitism

Claim:

Anticreationist complaints are a form of snobbery.  There are many more
important traits on which to judge people than whether they believe in
evolution.

Source:

Derbyshire, John, 2003.  Pseudoscience vs. snobbery: A
 Doonesbury lesson.  _National Review_ Online (Apr. 22),
 https://web.archive.org/web/20080428144746if_/http://www.nationalreview.com/derbyshire/derbyshire042203.asp

Response:

1. Most anticreationists would be content to let creationists believe as
   they wish and not make an issue of it.  However, creationists make
   creationism an important trait.  They make a huge deal of it and want
   to impose it on others.  If creationists did not believe that it is one
   of the most important traits on which to judge people, the
   creationism-evolution dispute would not exist.

2. The complaint of snobbery is based on the attitude that all opinions
   are equal.  Although that attitude sounds democratic and fair, it is
   indefensible.  Opinions have value to the extent that they are
   informed.  If you are suffering serious stomach problems, would you
   give equal weight to opinions from a professional gastroenterologist
   and a supermarket bag-boy?  When someone speaking on the subject of
   evolution is woefully uninformed on issues concerning evolution, it is
   entirely appropriate to point that out.  And the claims made by
   creationists show that almost all of them are woefully ignorant of
   evolution.  There are exceptions (Kurt Wise, for example), but they are
   very few.

3. The resolution of creationism as a scientific proposition rests on
   what the facts indicate, and facts are not determined by the
   personalities of the people who talk about them.  Creationists are free
   to avoid this issue entirely by approaching creationism as an entirely
   unscientific religious viewpoint, but they have chosen not to do so.

4. Many creationists have a literally holier-than-thou attitude.  For
   example, they (falsely) claim that believers of evolution are
   <CA602>atheistic> and <CA001>evil>.  You cannot get any more snobbish
   or elitist than that.

Links:

References:

Further Reading:

Sonnert, Gerhard, 2002.  _Ivory Bridges: Connecting Science and Society_,
 Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Date: 2003-6-25
