BriefClaim: Fabre was a creationist.
Title: J. H. Fabre and creationism
Keywords: Fabre, scientist, creationist.

Claim:

Jean-Henri Fabre (1823-1915) was a creationist and strong opponent to
evolution.

Source:

Morris, Henry M. 1982.  Bible-believing scientists of the past.  _Impact_
 103 (Jan.),
 http://www.icr.org/index.php?module=articles&action=view&ID=185

Response:

1. Jean-Henri Fabre did indeed reject evolution (or transformism).
   However, neither were his views those of a Biblical creationist.  He
   recognized that life changed through the various periods of earth's
   history.  For earth history, he took as his book not the Bible but the
   earth itself:

    "Let us break off a slab and subdivide it into sheets with the point
     of a knife, a work as easy as separating the superposed layers of a
     piece of paste- or mill-board.  In so doing, we are examining a
     volume taken from the library of the mountains, we are turning the
     pages of a magnificently illustrated book.  It is a manuscript of
     nature, far superior to the Egyptian papyrus.  On almost every page
     are diagrams; nay, better: realities converted into pictures. (Fabre
     1914, 178)

   The "pages" tell of different life at different times.

    "Life, at the start, fashioned oddities which would be screaming
     discords in the present harmony of things.  When it invented the
     Saurian, it revelled at first in monsters fifteen and twenty yards
     long.  It placed horns on their noses and eyes, paved their backs
     with fantastic scales, hollowed their necks into spiny wallets,
     wherein their heads withdrew as into a hood.  It even tried, though
     not with great success, to give them wings.  After these horrors, the
     procreating ardour calmed and produced the charming green Lizard of
     our hedges.
     <br /><br />
     When it invented the bird, it filled its beak with the pointed teeth
     of the reptile and appended a long, feathered tail unto its rump.
     These undetermined and revoltingly ugly creatures were the distant
     prelude to the Robin Redbreast and the Dove.
     <br /><br />
     All these primitives are noted for a very small skull, an idiot's
     brain.  The brute of antiquity is, first and foremost, an atrocious
     machine for snapping, with a stomach for digesting.  The intellect
     does not count as yet.  That will come later. (Fabre 1914, 182)

2. Fabre excelled at observation (Darwin called him "the inimitable
   observer"), but he was not a scientist.  He had no formal scientific
   training, and he set himself apart from the scientific community,
   acting instead as naturalist.  His hard life left him nither time nor
   inclination for theorizing (Favret 1999).

Links:

www.efabre.net. 2000-2003.  Jean-Henri Fabre, sa vie, son oeuvre.
 http://www.e-fabre.com/.  English version at http://www.efabre.net/

References:

1. Fabre, J. Henri. 1914.  _The Life and Love of the Insect_, transl. by
   Alexander Teixeira de Mattos. (chpt. 13: "The old weevils").  London:
   Adam and Charles Black.
2. Favret, Colin. 1999.  Jean-Henri Fabre: His life experiences and
   predisposition against Darwinism.  _American Entomologist_ 45(1):
   38-48.

Further Reading:

Fabre was twice nominated for a Nobel Prize in literature; his writings
 are still thoroughly enjoyable.

Date: 2004-12-31
