BriefClaim: Evolution has not been proved.
Title: Evolution proof
Keywords: theory, fact.

Claim:

Evolution has not been, and cannot be, proved.  We cannot even see
evolution (beyond trivially small change), much less test it
experimentally.

Source:

SciCre, pp. 4-6.

Response:

1. Nothing in the real world can be proved with absolute certainty.
   However, high degrees of certainty can be reached.  In the case of
   evolution, we have huge amounts of data from diverse fields.  Extensive
   evidence exists in all of the following different forms (Theobald
   2004).  Each new piece of evidence tests the rest.
    - All life shows a fundamental unity in the mechanisms of replication,
      heritability, catalysis, and metabolism.
    - Common descent predicts a nested hierarchy pattern, or groups
      within groups.  We see just such an arrangement in a unique,
      consistent, well-defined hierarchy, the so-called tree of life.
    - Different lines of evidence give the same arrangement of the tree of
      life.  We get essentially the same results whether we look at
      morphological, biochemical, or genetic traits.
    - Fossil animals fit in the same tree of life.  We find several cases
      of <CC200>transitional forms> in the fossil record.
    - The fossils appear in a chronological order, showing change
      consistent with common descent over hundreds of millions of years
      and inconsistent with sudden creation.
    - Many organisms show rudimentary, vestigial characters, such as
      sightless eyes or wings useless for flight.
    - Atavisms sometimes occur.  An atavism is the reappearance of a
      character present in a distant ancestor but lost in the organism's
      immediate ancestors.  We only see atavisms consistent with
      organisms' evolutionary histories.
    - Ontogeny (embryology and developmental biology) gives information
      about the historical pathway of an organism's evolution.  For
      example, as embryos whales and many snakes develop hind limbs that
      are reabsorbed before birth.
    - The distribution of species is consistent with their evolutionary
      history.  For example, marsupials are mostly limited to Australia,
      and the exceptions are explained by continental drift.  Remote
      islands often have species groups that are highly diverse in habits
      and general appearance but closely related genetically.  Squirrel
      diversity coincides with tectonic and sea level changes (Mercer and
      Roth 2003).  Such consistency still holds when the distribution of
      fossil species is included.
    - Evolution predicts that new structures are adapted from other
      structures that already exist, and thus similarity in structures
      should reflect evolutionary history rather than function.  We see
      this frequently.  For example, human hands, bat wings, horse legs,
      whale flippers, and mole forelimbs all have similar bone structure
      despite their different functions.
    - The same principle applies on a molecular level.  Humans share a
      large percentage of their genes, probably more than 70 percent,
      with a fruit fly or a nematode worm.
    - When two organisms evolve the same function independently, different
      structures are often recruited.  For example, wings of birds, bats,
      pterosaurs, and insects all have different structures.
      <CB921.2>Gliding> has been implemented in many additional ways.
      Again, this applies on a molecular level, too.
    - The constraints of evolutionary history sometimes lead to suboptimal
      structures and functions.  For example, the human throat and
      respiratory system make it impossible to breathe and swallow at the
      same time and make us susceptible to choking.
    - Suboptimality appears also on the molecular level.  For example,
      much DNA is nonfunctional.
    - Some nonfunctional DNA, such as certain transposons, pseudogenes,
      and endogenous viruses, show a pattern of inheritance indicating
      common ancestry.
    - <CB910>Speciation> has been observed.
    - The day-to-day aspects of evolution -- heritable genetic
      change, morphological variation and change, functional change, and
      natural selection -- are seen to occur at rates consistent with
      common descent.

   Furthermore, the different lines of evidence are consistent; they all
   point to the same big picture.  For example, evidence from gene
   duplications in the yeast genome shows that its ability to ferment
   glucose evolved about eighty million years ago.  Fossil evidence shows
   that fermentable fruits became prominent about the same time.  Genetic
   evidence for major change around that time also is found in fruiting
   plants and fruit flies (Benner et al. 2002).

   The evidence is extensive and consistent, and it points unambiguously
   to evolution, including common descent, change over time, and
   adaptation influenced by natural selection.  It would be preposterous
   to refer to these as anything other than facts.

Links:

Theobald, Douglas. 2004.  29+ Evidences for macroevolution: The scientific
 case for common descent.  http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/comdesc/

Colby, Chris. 1993.  Evidence for evolution:  An eclectic survey.
 http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/evolution-research.html

Moran, Laurence. 1993.  Evolution is a fact and a theory.
 http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/evolution-fact.html

References:

1. Benner, S. A., M. D. Caraco, J. M. Thomson and E. A. Gaucher. 2002.
   Planetary biology--paleontological, geological, and molecular histories
   of life.  _Science_ 296: 864-868.
2. Mercer, John M. and V. Louise Roth. 2003.  The effects of Cenozoic
   global change on squirrel phylogeny.  _Science_ 299: 1568-1572.
2. Theobald, D. 2004.  (see above)

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-4-21, 2005-2-24
