BriefClaim: Karl Popper said Darwinism is not testable.
Title: Popper on natural selection's testability
Keywords: Popper, falsifiability, testability, science.

Claim:

According to philosopher of science Sir Karl Popper, a theory must be
falsifiable to qualify as scientific.  Popper (1976, 151) said, "Darwinism
is not a testable scientific theory but a metaphysical research
programme."

Source:

Kranz, Russell. n.d.  Karl Popper's challenge.
 http://www.creationism.org/csshs/v02n4p20.htm

Response:

1. Popper's statement of nonfalsifiability was pretty mild, not as
   extensive as it is often taken.  He applied it only to natural
   selection, not evolution as a whole, and he allowed that some testing
   of natural selection was possible, just not a significant amount.

   Moreover, he said that natural selection is a useful theory.  A
   "metaphysical research programme" was to him not a bad thing; it is an
   essential part of science, as it guides productive research by
   suggesting predictions.  He said of Darwinism,

    "And yet, the theory is invaluable.  I do not see how, without it, our
     knowledge could have grown as it has done since Darwin.  In trying to
     explain experiments with bacteria which become adapted to, say,
     penicillin, it is quite clear that we are greatly helped by the
     theory of natural selection.  Although it is metaphysical, it sheds
     much light upon very concrete and very practical researches.  It
     allows us to study adaptation to a new environment (such as a
     penicillin-infested environment) in a rational way: it suggests the
     existence of a mechanism of adaptation, and it allows us even to
     study in detail the mechanism at work.  And it is the only theory so
     far which does all that. (Popper 1976, 171-172)

   Finally, Popper notes that theism as an explanation of adaptation "was
   worse than an open admission of failure, for it created the impression
   that an ultimate explanation had been reached" (Popper 1976, 172).

2. Popper later changed his mind and recognized that natural selection is
   testable.  Here is an excerpt from a later writing on "Natural
   Selection and Its Scientific Status" (Miller 1985, 241-243; see also
   Popper 1978):

    "When speaking here of Darwinism, I shall speak always of today's
     theory - that is Darwin's own theory of natural selection supported
     by the Mendelian theory of heredity, by the theory of the mutation
     and recombination of genes in a gene pool, and by the decoded genetic
     code.  This is an immensely impressive and powerful theory.  The
     claim that it completely explains evolution is of course a bold
     claim, and very far from being established.  All scientific theories
     are conjectures, even those that have successfully passed many severe
     and varied tests.  The Mendelian underpinning of modern Darwinism has
     been well tested, and so has the theory of evolution which says that
     all terrestrial life has evolved from a few primitive unicellular
     organisms, possibly even from one single organism.

     However, Darwin's own most important contribution to the theory of
     evolution, his theory of natural selection, is difficult to test.
     There are some tests, even some experimental tests; and in some
     cases, such as the famous phenomenon known as 'industrial melanism',
     we can observe natural selection happening under our very eyes, as it
     were.  Nevertheless, really severe tests of the theory of natural
     selection are hard to come by, much more so than tests of otherwise
     comparable theories in physics or chemistry.

     The fact that the theory of natural selection is difficult to test
     has led some people, anti-Darwinists and even some great Darwinists,
     to claim that it is a tautology [see <CA500>CA500>].  A tautology
     like 'All tables are tables' is not, of course, testable; nor has it
     any explanatory power.  It is therefore most surprising to hear that
     some of the greatest contemporary Darwinists themselves formulate the
     theory in such a way that it amounts to the tautology that those
     organisms that leave most offspring leave most offspring.
     C. H. Waddington says somewhere (and he defends this view in other
     places) that 'Natural selection . . . turns out ... to be a
     tautology' ..4 However, he attributes at the same place to the theory
     an 'enormous power. ... of explanation'.  Since the explanatory power
     of a tautology is obviously zero, something must be wrong here.

     Yet similar passages can be found in the works of such great
     Darwinists as Ronald Fisher, J. B. S. Haldane, and George Gaylord
     Simpson; and others.

     I mention this problem because I too belong among the culprits.
     Influenced by what these authorities say, I have in the past
     described the theory as 'almost tautological', and I have tried to
     explain how the theory of natural selection could be untestable (as
     is a tautology) and yet of great scientific interest.  My solution
     was that the doctrine of natural selection is a most successful
     metaphysical research programme.  It raises detailed problems in many
     fields, and it tells us what we would expect of an acceptable
     solution of these problems.

     I still believe that natural selection works in this way as a
     research programme.  Nevertheless, I have changed my mind about the
     testability and the logical status of the theory of natural
     selection; and I am glad to have an opportunity to make a
     recantation.  My recantation may, I hope, contribute a little to the
     understanding of the status of natural selection.

Links:

Brush, Stephen G. 1994.  Popper and evolution.  RNCSE 13(4)-14(1): 29.
 https://web.archive.org/web/20070519062019if_/http://www.ncseweb.org/resources/articles/8401_popper_and_evolution_9_10_2003.asp

References:

1. Miller, David. 1985.  _Popper Selections_.
2. Popper, Karl. 1976.  _Unended Quest: An Intellectual Autobiography_
   Glasgow: Fontana/Collins.
3. Popper, Karl. 1978.  Natural selection and the emergence of mind.
   _Dialectica_ 32: 339-355.  (excerpt at
   https://web.archive.org/web/20091027093508if_/http://www.geocities.com/criticalrationalist/popperevolution.htm )

Further Reading:

Cole, John R. 1981.  Misquoted scientists respond.  _Creation/Evolution_
 6: 34-44.

Date: 2005-11-2
