BriefClaim: Interpreting evidence is not the same as observation.
Title: Interpretation and observation
Keywords: evidence, observation, interpretation, hypothesis, theory.

Claim:

Evidence for evolution has not been observed.  Claims that it has confuse
observation with interpretation.  What is observed has to be interpreted
to fit the hypotheses.

Source:

Wallace, Timothy. 2002.  Five major _evolutionist_ misconceptions about
 evolution.  https://web.archive.org/web/20080518113931if_/http://www.trueorigins.org/isakrbtl.asp

Response:

1. All observation requires interpretation.  Even something as seemingly
   simple as seeing an object in front of you requires a great deal of
   interpretation to determine what it is, what properties it exhibits,
   how far away it is, and so forth (Sacks 1995).  To dismiss absolutely
   everything we know because it is interpretation would be ludicrous.

2. Most of the evidence of evolution is not the sort about which
   interpretation is in question.  The evidence consists of such things
   as the following:
    - certain trilobite species are found in certain geological formations;
    - many more varieties of marsupials are found in Australia than
      elsewhere;
    - bacteria in test tubes have been seen to change in certain ways over
      time;
    - flies share some traits that other insects do not;
   and millions of other such facts, none of which are in dispute.

   The sort of interpretation to which creationists object is how all the
   evidence fits together.  They do not deny the evidence (not most of it,
   anyway); they deny that it is evidence _for evolution_.

   However, a fact gets to be considered evidence for a theory if it fits
   that theory and does not fit or is not covered by competing theories.
   (Ideally, the theory should predict the fact before the fact is known,
   but that is not essential for the fact to be evidence.)  The millions
   of facts referred to above fit this criterion, so they qualify as
   evidence for evolution.

3. The interpretation on which creationism depends, in contrast, is based
   only on highly questionable and subjective ideas that do not fit
   together into a coherent whole.

Links:

Wilkins, John. 1997.  Evolution and philosophy: Is evolution science, and
 what does 'science' mean? 
 http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/evolphil/falsify.html

References:

1. Sacks, Oliver. 1995.  _An Anthropologist on Mars_.  New York: Vintage
   Books.

Further Reading:

Date: 2001-2-18
