BriefClaim: Naturalistic science will miss a supernatural explanation.
Title: Naturalistic investigation and the supernatural
Keywords: naturalism, supernatural

Claim:

If the correct explanation for a phenomenon happens to be supernatural,
the naturalistic method of science will miss it.  "With creationist
explanations disqualified at the outset, it follows that the evidence will
always support the naturalistic alternative."

Source:

Johnson, Phillip E., 1990.  Evolution as dogma: The establishment
 of naturalism.  _First Things_ (Oct.), 15-22.
 http://www.arn.org/docs/johnson/pjdogma1.htm

Response:

1. Nobody has ever come up with a useful definition of supernatural.  By
   most definitions, something having an effect on nature makes that
   something a part of nature itself.  So any explanation for something we
   see in nature can be considered natural by definition.

2. We cannot observe the supernatural, so the only way we could reach the
   supernatural explanation would be to eliminate all natural
   explanations.  But we can never know that we have eliminated all
   possibilities.  Even if a supernatural explanation is correct, we can
   never reach it.

3. Suppose we do conclude that a supernatural explanation is correct.  It
   is impossible, even in principle, to distinguish one supernatural
   explanation from another.  Many people, including many scientists, are
   willing to accept certain supernatural explanations on faith.  There is
   nothing wrong with that as long as they do not claim special privilege
   for their faith.  Some people, however, are not satisfied unless others
   believe as they do; this group includes all those who want to make the
   supernatural a part of science.  Since they cannot make their case by
   using naturalistic evidence, they must resort to other means, such as
   force of arms.  (This is not hyperbole.  Such groups continually
   attempt to get political enforcement on their side.)

4. If we do miss a supernatural explanation, so what?  Supernatural
   explanations cannot be generalized, so the explanation does not matter
   anywhere else.  The usefulness of science comes from the ability to
   apply findings to different areas.  Any supernatural explanation would
   be useless.

5. Explanations in terms of the supernatural are evaluated to the extent
   it is actually possible to do so.  For example, scientists have
   investigated faith healing (Benson et al. 2006) and creationist claims
   about a <CH550>global flood> and <CH210>age of the earth>.

6. Creationist accounts of origins are not disqualified.  People are
   free to believe whatever religion they choose.  P. E. Johnson and
   others like him merely object to their religion not being taught as
   science to the exclusion of all other religious interpretations (not to
   mention to the exclusion of all of science).

Links:

References:

1. Benson, H. et al. 2006.  Study of the Therapeutic Effects of
   Intercessory Prayer (STEP) in cardiac bypass patients: a multicenter
   randomized trial of uncertainty and certainty of receiving intercessory
   prayer.  _American Heart Journal_ 151(4): 934-942.

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-4-15, 2006-4-7
