BriefClaim: Evolution's materialism or naturalism denies a role for God.
Title: Evolution and a role for God
Keywords: materialism, methodological naturalism, theism, atheism

Claim:

Evolution's materialism or methodological naturalism denies a role for
God.  "Methodological naturalism asks us for the sake of science to
pretend that the material world is all there is" (Dembski, 1996).

Source:

Johnson, Phillip E. 1999.  The church of Darwin. _Wall Street Journal_,
 16 Aug. 1999, http://www.arn.org/docs/johnson/chofdarwin.htm


Response:

1. This is simply a lie.  There are numerous scientists who embrace both
   evolution and God.  They believe not only that God created a universe
   in which evolution occurs naturally but that God works constantly in
   their and other people's lives.  The claim otherwise by Johnson,
   Dembski, and others is an overt rejection of other people's religious
   beliefs.

2. This claim applies not only to evolution; it logically should apply to
   people who believe in materialism or methodological naturalism in any
   science or any aspect of life.  All people who believe that God does
   not intervene to keep planets rotating, cause winds, or make sodas
   fizz, according to this claim, must be atheists.  It is obvious that
   they are not.  Many famous scientists were and are devout Christians
   who use, in their work, exactly the same sort of naturalism that
   evolutionary science uses.

3. From a practical point of view, the people who make this claim are
   denying more than advocating a role for God.  They say that theistic
   evolution is no different from atheistic evolution because it does not
   show God acting directly.  For them, a God that does not act
   supernaturally is equivalent to no god at all.  But nothing
   supernatural is happening around me right now; in fact, I have never
   seen anything supernatural occur.  Does that mean God is not around?
   According to Johnson and others who believe his claim, God is
   irrelevant for almost all of our lives.

Links:

Isaak, Mark. 2002.  A philosophical premise of 'naturalism'?
 http://www.talkdesign.org/faqs/naturalism.html

References:

1. Dembski, William A. 1996.  What every theologian should know about
   creation, evolution and design.
   http://www.arn.org/docs/dembski/wd_theologn.htm

Further Reading:

Date: 2001-2-18
