BriefClaim: Naturalistic evolution rules out all but a Deist god.
Title: Evolution vs. Deism
Keywords: deism, naturalism

Claim:

"Naturalistic evolution is consistent with the existence of 'God' only if
by that term we mean no more than a first cause which retires from further
activity after establishing the laws of nature and setting the natural
mechanism in motion."

Source:

Johnson, Phillip E. 1990.  Evolution as Dogma: The Establishment
 of Naturalism.  _First Things_ (Oct.), 15-22.
 http://www.arn.org/docs/johnson/pjdogma1.htm

Response:

1. This claim logically applies not only to evolution but to everything
   that naturalism applies to, including electricity, ecology, gravity,
   weather, optics, and very nearly everything else.  Johnson effectively
   sets up a false dichotomy of rejecting all of nature or all of God.

   The claim has been rejected by serious Christians (and devout members
   of other religions) since evolution was first proposed.  They believe
   that God and nature are not incompatible, that God can work in ways
   consistent with evolution.  For example, some people believe that God
   provides strength and inspiration on a personal level.

2. Johnson's view of God effectively rejects God.  He says that
   supernaturalism is an essential aspect of God: Since nothing
   supernatural is happening around me, God is not part of my life.  If I
   were to adopt Johnson's view of God, I would call myself an atheist.

3. A god that is active supernaturally brings the problem of evil to the
   forefront.  It means that God created suffering and could eliminate it
   if he wanted to.  Through his inaction, God becomes responsible for
   evil.

Links:

References:

Further Reading:

Pennock, Robert T. 1996.  Naturalism, evidence, and creationism: The case
 of Phillip Johnson.  In: _Intelligent Design Creationism and Its
 Critics_, ed. R. T. Pennock, MIT Press, 2002.  Orig. pub. in _Biology and
 Philosphy_ 11(4): 543-549.

Ruse, Michael. 2001.  _Can a Darwinian be a Christian?_  Cambridge
 University Press.

Date: 2003-7-11, 2004-2-16

