BriefClaim: Darwin made it easy to become an intellectually fulfilled atheist.
Title: An intellectually fulfilled atheist
Keywords: atheist

Claim:

By providing a naturalistic explanation of biological origins, evolution
promotes atheism.  "Although atheism might have been _logically_ tenable
before Darwin, Darwin made it possible to be an intellectually fulfilled
atheist" (Dawkins 1986, 6)..

Source:

Berlinski, David. 1996.  The deniable Darwin.  _Commentary_ 101(6) (Jun).
  https://web.archive.org/web/20190407174246if_/http://www.rae.org/dendar.html

Response:

1. Naturalistic explanations of origins are not necessary for atheism.
   Nobody in the world can explain the origin of everything anyway.
   Leaving one more thing unexplained does not much matter.  Dawkins's
   claim is the flip side of the "God of the Gaps" fallacy.

2. Naturalistic explanations of origins do not make atheism mandatory.
   If God is the creator, it would make sense that he would be responsible
   for creating everything, including evolution and the laws that make it
   operate.

3. Darwin was not alone in providing naturalistic explanations.  Many
   people before him removed God from explanations for parts of the
   universe.  Pierre-Simon Laplace provided a natural explanation for the
   origin and stability of the solar system.  Friedrich W&ouml;hler
   synthesized urea, showing that there was no "vital" element in organic
   material.  David Hume argued that design was not necessary for the
   origin of life.  Darwin, by providing the mechanism, merely filled in
   one of the last gaps.  It was possible to be an intellectually
   fulfilled atheist even before Darwin (Gliboff 2000).

4. There is nothing wrong with being an atheist if you want to be an
   atheist.  That some people disapprove only shows that there is
   something wrong with religious bigots.

5. Due mainly to its being rife with intellectual dishonesty, creationism
   also drives some people to atheism (Babinski 1995).

Links:

References:

1. Babinski, Ed. 1995.  _Leaving the Fold: Testimonies of Former
   Fundamentalists_.  Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books.
2. Dawkins, Richard. 1986.  _The Blind Watchmaker_. New York: Norton.
3. Gliboff, S. 2000.  Paley's design argument as an inference to the best
   explanation, or, Dawkins' dilemma.  _Studies in History and Philosophy
   of Biological and Biomedical Sciences_ 31(4): 579-597.

Further Reading:

Date: 2000-9-30, 2003-8-8
