BriefClaim: Evolution is a religion.
Title: Evolution religious
Keywords: evolution, religion

Claim:

Evolution is a religion because it encompasses views of values and
ultimate meanings.

Source:

SciCre, pp. 196-200.


Response:

1. Evolution merely describes part of nature.  The fact that that part of
   nature is important to many people does not make evolution a religion.
   Consider some attributes of religion and how evolution compares:
    - Religions explain ultimate reality.  Evolution stops with the
      development of life (it does not even include the origins of life).
    - Religions describe the place and role of humans within ultimate
      reality.  Evolution describes only our biological background
      relative to present and recent human environments.
    - Religions almost always include reverence for and/or belief in a
      supernatural power or powers.  Evolution does not.
    - Religions have a social structure built around their beliefs.
      Although science as a whole has a social structure, no such
      structure is particular to evolutionary biologists, and one does not
      have to participate in that structure to be a scientist.
    - Religions impose moral prescriptions on their members.  Evolution
      does not.  Evolution has been used (and misused) as a basis for
      morals and values by some people, such as Thomas Henry Huxley,
      Herbert Spencer, and E. O. Wilson (Ruse 2000), but their view,
      although based on evolution, is not the science of evolution; it
      goes beyond that.
    - Religions include rituals and sacraments.  With the possible
      exception of college graduation ceremonies, there is nothing
      comparable in evolutionary studies.
    - Religious ideas are highly static; they change primarily by
      splitting off new religions.  Ideas in evolutionary biology change
      rapidly as new evidence is found.

2. How can a religion not have any adherents?  When asked their religion,
   many, perhaps most, people who believe in evolution will call
   themselves members of mainstream religions, such as Christianity,
   Buddhism, and Hinduism.  None identify their religion as evolution.
   If evolution is a religion, it is the only religion that is rejected by
   all its members.

3. Evolution may be considered a religion under the metaphorical
   definition of something pursued with zeal or conscientious devotion.
   This, however, could also apply to stamp collecting, watering plants,
   or practically any other activity.  Calling evolution a religion makes
   religion effectively meaningless.

4. Evolutionary theory has been used as a basis for studying and
   speculating about the biological basis for morals and religious
   attitudes (Sober and Wilson 1998).  Studying religion, though, does not
   make the study a religion.  Using evolution to study the origins of
   religious attitudes does not make evolution a religion any more than
   using archaeology to study the origins of biblical texts makes
   archaeology a religion.

5. Evolution as religion has been rejected by the courts:

     "Assuming for the purposes of argument, however, that evolution is a
      religion or religious tenet, the remedy is to stop the teaching of
      evolution, not establish another religion in opposition to it. Yet
      it is clearly established in the case law, and perhaps also in
      common sense, that evolution is not a religion and that teaching
      evolution does not violate the Establishment Clause.

   The court cases _Epperson v.  Arkansas_, _Willoughby v. Stever_, and
   _Wright v. Houston Indep. School Dist._ are cited as precedent
   (McLean v. Arkansas Board of Education 1982).

Links:

VonRoeschlaub, Warren Kurt. 1998. God and evolution.
  http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/faq-god.html

References:

1. McLean v. Arkansas Board of Education. 1982.
   http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/mclean-v-arkansas.html
2. Ruse, Michael. 2000.  Creationists correct?: Darwinians wrongly mix
   science with morality, politics.  _National Post_, 13 May 2000.
   http://www.members.shaw.ca/mschindler/A/eyring_2_2.htm
3. Sober, Elliott and David Sloan Wilson. 1998.  _Unto Others: The
   evolution and psychology of unselfish behavior_.  Cambridge, MA:
   Harvard University Press.

Further Reading:

Date: 2001-2-18, 2003-7-5
