BriefClaim: Ten Peking Man skeletons were suppressed.
Title: Lost Peking Man Skeletons
Keywords: Peking Man, fraud, 

Claim:

Initial newspaper reports of the Peking Man discovery reported that ten
skeletons were found, but only a partial skull was ever exhibited.  These
skeletons have been suppressed, probably destroyed by scientists because
they were too human and thus did not provide evidence for evolution.  No
scientists ever questioned what happened to the ten skeletons.

Source:

Bowden, Malcom, 1981.  _Ape-men: Fact or Fallacy?_ 2nd ed., Bromley, Kent:
 Sovereign, pp. 95-96.


Response:

1. A contemporary report of the claim in _Nature_ referred only to
   "remains of ten individuals."  A letter from Teilhard de
   Chardin says, "Black estimates that there are traces of at least 10
   individuals."  Probably the newspapers, which are
   frequently inaccurate on scientific matters, assumed the most
   sensational interpretation of the "traces" and turned them into entire
   skeletons.

2. Other reports of the find by the scientists involved mention only
   finding a skull, including a letter written before the supposed
   decision to do away with the skeletons.  If the skeletons existed,
   surely they would have been mentioned as well.

3. Fraud is highly improbable because the secret would have to be kept by
   many people, including English, French, and Chinese scientists and
   dozens of workers.  Probably none of the scientists would have been
   willing to destroy the skeletons, because a discovery of such size and
   completeness would have made their career, no matter what the skeletons
   showed.

4. Excavating the skullcap alone required a significant amount of effort.
   It is highly unlikely that excavating ten entire skeletons to the point
   where they could be analyzed could be done in three weeks.

5. Bowden's claim that no scientist questions the reports of the ten
   skeletons is simply wrong.  At least two scientists referred to the
   newspaper exaggerations. [Boule 1929]

Links:

Foley, Jim, 1999.  Creationist arguments: The lost Peking Man skeletons. 
 http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/homs/lostskels.html

References:

1. Boule M., 1929.  Le Sinanthropus.  _L'Anthropologie_ 39: 455-460,
   cited in Foley 1999.
#1. Anon., 1929 (Dec. 28).  Pleistocene man in China. _Nature_
#   124: 973-974.

Further Reading:

Date: 2001-2-18, 2003-9-4
