BriefClaim: Anthropologists disagree.
Title: What anthropologists say
Keywords: scientific method

Claim:

Anthropologists disagree about what the human family tree looks like.
Every new discovery seems to give reason to redraw the tree, whereas we
would expect the tree to become clearer as discoveries accumulate.

Source:

LifeHow, p. 88.

Response:

1. Pointing to the disagreements is a ruse to distract from the areas
   where there is agreement.  There is no significant disagreement among
   professionals that modern humans evolved from an African
   australopithecine or that other hominids sometimes coexisted with the
   lineage that led to humans.

2. Much of the disagreement is hype.  When someone discovers yet another
   _Homo erectus_ fossil from the same region and era as other _Homo
   erectus_ fossils, newspapers do not trumpet the headline, "Another
   Fossil Supports Hominid Lineage."  Such fossils are not news except to
   the paleoanthropologists who work on them.  The headlines go to the
   truly novel finds.

   Disagreement is also hyped because it makes a better emotional story.
   Anthropologists would be glad to make a discovery that overturns
   conventional understanding, and news reporters favor such stories as
   well, so the significance of small disagreements tends to get
   magnified.

3. Disagreement and uncertainty are routine in areas opened by new
   scientific discoveries.  Paleoanthropology is a field in which new
   discoveries are not uncommon, so there will be uncertainty at first
   around those discoveries.  However, paleoanthropology is also a mature
   science at its core; the uncertainty and disagreement there is at a
   minimum.

4. Disagreements get resolved.  This is an important feature of science
   never found in creationism.  As more data are discovered, the data
   answer the questions we have.  For example, it was once unknown whether
   Neanderthals and modern humans were separate species.  Molecular
   evidence now strongly indicates that they were (Krings et al. 2000).
   The record may be insufficient to answer some of our questions, such as
   when language began, but by and large, our questions can and do get
   answered.

Links:

References:

1. Krings, M. et al., 2000.  A view of Neandertal genetic diversity.
   _Nature Genetics_ 26: 144-146.

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-6-18, 2003-9-17
