BriefClaim: An iron pot was found encased in Carboniferous coal.
Title: Iron pot in coal
Keywords: out-of-place artifact, oopart, coal

Claim:

In 1912, Frank Kennard, an electric plant worker, broke apart a large lump
of coal, and an iron cup fell from the center, leaving a cast of the pot
in the coal.  The coal came from the Wilurton Coal Mines and is about 295
million years old, from the Mid-Pennsylvanian.

Source:

CEM Online. n.d.  The iron cup in coal.
 https://web.archive.org/web/20070406081048if_/http://www.creationevidence.org/museum_tour/ironpot/ironpot.html

Response:

1. The evidence in support of the claim is so weak as to be scientifically
   useless.  The only evidence is a letter from 1948, thirty-six years
   after the artifact was discovered.  The letter says that the coal was
   not found _in situ_ but went through an unknown amount of processing
   between the mine and the discovery of the iron cup after the coal was
   delivered.

2. The cup appears to be cast iron, and cast iron technology began in the
   eighteenth century.  Its design is much like pots used to hold molten
   metals and may have been used by a tinsmith, tinker, or person casting
   bullets.  Without the original pot to analyze, we cannot say exactly
   how it was used.

3. The cup was likely dropped by a worker either inside a coal mine or in
   a mine's surface workings.  Mineralization is common in the coal and
   surrounding debris of coal mines because rainwater reacts with the
   newly exposed minerals and produces highly mineralized solutions.
   Coal, sediments, and rocks are commonly cemented together in just a few
   years.  It could easily appear that a pot cemented in such a concretion
   could appear superficially as if it were encased in the original coal.
   Or small pieces of coal, including powder, could have been recompressed
   around the cup by weight.

Links:

#http://www.bibleandscience.com/science/footprints.htm

References:

Further Reading:

#Acknowledgments: John Cole, Paul Heinrich, Andy Dingley

Date: 2005-5-4
