BriefClaim: Transitional fossils do not show direct ancestry.
Title: Transitional fossils and direct ancestry
Keywords: transitional fossil, ancestry, descent

Claim:

Sequences of transitional fossils do not show direct ancestry.  For
example, with the fossil <CC216_1>whale transition>, which evolutionists
consider as good a series of transitional fossils as one could hope to
find, the fossils show extinct side lineages at best.  Even if we had a
fossil of every individual in the lineage, we could not verify direct
ancestry.  Fossils cannot show evidence of descent with modification even
in principle.

Source:

Wells, Jonathan, 2006.  _The Politically Incorrect Guide to Darwinism and
 Intelligent Design_.  Washington DC: Regnery, 18-23.

Response:

1. Perfect knowledge is not necessary to verify a pattern.  One does not
   need to watch Jupiter constantly for twelve years, without blinking, to
   verify that it orbits the sun.  Common descent implies a pattern of
   gradual change and diversification through time.  The hundreds of
   thousands of fossils which have been discovered are consistent with
   this pattern, and they are not consistent with any other pattern that
   has been proposed.  (In particular, they rule out the possibility that
   all present life forms existed in essentially the same form throughout
   the history of life.)  It is conceivable that fossils which have not
   been found might differ wildly from this pattern, just at it is
   conceivable that Jupiter might zigzag across the Solar System while we
   blinked, but there is no reason to think so.

   A transitional fossil is simply a fossil which shows traits
   intermediate between two other fossils.  Transitional fossils show
   likely relationships clearly, and they sometimes show details of how
   particular features arose.  For example, the transitional fossils from
   <CC215>reptiles to mammals> show how the inner ear bones developed.
   Such patterns are shown whether the fossils are connected by direct
   ancestry or by another close relationship.  And since we expect extinct
   side lineages to be common, we would have evidence against evolution if
   most transitional fossils were not from extinct side lineages.

2. Knowledge advances by subjecting hypotheses to tests that effectively
   distinguish one hypothesis from another.  Fossil evidence, along with
   <CA202>other lines of evidence>, does this.  Since every hypothesis
   would fail Wells's requirement for having perfect knowledge before
   accepting it, his is not an effective test.  It can serve only to
   reinforce one's own preconceptions.  Wells himself promotes other
   propositions on much less evidence, to put it mildly.

Links:

References:

Further Reading:

Date: 2006-8-24
