BriefClaim: The fossil record shows sudden appearance followed by stasis.
Title: Fossil record of gradual vs. sudden change
Keywords: punctuated equilibrium, fossil record, phyletic gradualism

Claim:

The fossil record doesn't show gradual change; it shows sudden
appearances followed by stasis.
(=> CC201)

Source:

Johnson, Phillip E., 1990.  Evolution as dogma: The establishment
 of naturalism.  _First Things_ no. 6, p. 15-22,
 http://www.arn.org/docs/johnson/pjdogma1.htm

Response:

1. Once species are well-adapted to an environment, selective pressures
   tend to keep them that way.  A change in the environment which alters
   the selective pressure would then end the "stasis" (or lead to
   extinction).

   Although gradualism is generally considered the Darwinian view (and
   seemed to be the dominant view held by his successors), Darwin himself
   wrote of stasis and relatively rapid change as well as the likelihood
   of the fossil record tending to amplify the appearance of such.
   (See also <CC201>"We should see a smooth fossil record">.)

    "It is a more important consideration . . . that the period during
     which each species underwent modification, though long as measured by
     years, was probably short in comparison with that during which it
     remained without undergoing any change. [Darwin, ch. 10, "On the
     imperfection of the geological record," p. 428]

    "It has been asserted over and over again, by writers who believe in
     the immutability of species, that geology yields no linking
     forms. This assertion, as we shall see in the next chapter, is
     certainly erroneous.  As Sir J. Lubbock has remarked, "Every species
     is a link between other allied forms." If we take a genus having a
     score of species, recent and extinct, and destroy fourfifths of them,
     no one doubts that the remainder will stand much more distinct from
     each other. If the extreme forms in the genus happen to have been
     thus destroyed, the genus itself will stand more distinct from other
     allied genera. What geological research has not revealed, is the
     former existence of infinitely numerous gradations, as fine as
     existing varieties, connecting together nearly all existing and
     extinct species. But this ought not to be expected; yet this has been
     repeatedly advanced as a most serious objection against my
     views. [p. 428]

    "When we see a species first appearing in the middle of any formation,
     it would be rash in the extreme to infer that it had not elsewhere
     previously existed. So again, when we find a species disappearing
     before the last layers have been deposited, it would be equally rash
     to suppose that it then became extinct. We forget how small the area
     of Europe is compared with the rest of the world . . . when we see a
     species first appearing in any formation, the probability is that it
     only then first immigrated into that area. [p. 423]

    "[V]arieties are generally at first local; and that such local
     varieties do not spread widely and supplant their parent-form until
     they have been modified and perfected in some considerable
     degree. According to this view, the chance of discovering in a
     formation in any one country all the early stages of transition
     between any two forms is small, for the successive changes are
     supposed to have been local or confined to some one spot.
     [pp. 427-428]

2. The fossil record does include some <CC200>transitional sequences>
   which show gradual change.

3. The fossil record still shows a great deal of change over time.  The
   creationists who make this claim almost never admit its logical
   conclusion, that there have been hundreds, perhaps even millions, of
   separate creation events scattered through time.

Links:

Elsberry, Wesley, 1996.  Punctuated equilibria.
 http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/punc-eq.html

References:

1. Darwin, C., 1872.  _The Origin of Species_, 1st Edition.  Senate,
   London.  http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/origin.html

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-4-15, 2004-2-13
