BriefClaim: Coconino Sandstone was deposited underwater.
Title: Coconino Sandstone deposition environment.
Keywords: desert

Claim:

The Coconino Sandstone, the origin of which is conventionally attributed
to desert sand dunes, was deposited by water.  Evidence for this (in
addition to the character of <CC365>fossil footprints> therein) includes
cross-bedding angles of only 25 degrees, not the 30-34 degrees one expects
from desert dunes.

Source:

Snelling, Andrew A. and Steven A. Austin, 1992.  Grand Canyon: Startling
 evidence for Noah's Flood!  _Creation Ex Nihilo_ 15(1): 47.
 http://www.answersingenesis.org/home/area/magazines/docs/v15n1_grandcanyon.asp

Response:

1. Eolian (wind-blown) and subaqueous dunes have superficial similarities,
   but they differ in particulars.  There is a great deal of diverse
   evidence that the Coconino Sandstone originated as eolian desert dunes.
   As McKee (1979, 204) stated:

    "The basis for considering the Coconino Sandstone to be of eolian
     origin involves numerous criteria, some of which are distinctive of
     an eolian environment and others merely compatible with but not
     diagnostic of it.  No single type of evidence seems entirely
     conclusive, but, together, the various features present very strong
     evidence.  The principal criteria of dune deposition are as follows:

      1. The extent and homogeneity of the sand body.

      2. The tabular-planar and wedge-planar type and large scale of
         cross-stratification.  The common high-angle deposits are
         interpreted as slipfaces on the lee sides of dunes, and the
         relatively rare low-angle cross-strata that dip toward the
         opposite quadrant apparently represent deposits of windward
         slopes.

      3. Slump marks of several varieties preserved on the steeply dipping
         surfaces of lee-side deposits.  These are distinctive of dry sand
         avalanching.

      4. Ripple marks which are common on surfaces of high-angle
         crossbedding suggest eolian deposition both by their high indexes
         (above 15) and by their orientation with axes parallel to dip
         slope.

      5. The local preservation of a distinctive type of rain pit.  Such
         pits illustrate the cohesion of sand grains with added moisture
         and a reorientation of the crater axes with respect to bedding
         slopes.

      6. Successions of miniature rises or steps ascending dip slopes of
         crossbeds.

      7. The preservation in fine sand of reptile footprints and probable
         millipede trails with sharp definition and clear impression.

      8. The consistent orientation of reptilian tracks up (not down) the
         steep foreset slopes.

   Since McKee published, additional types of terrestrial trace fossils,
   paleosols, and other distinctive eolian sedimentary structures have
   been recognized in Coconino and related eolian strata.

   If a person looks carefully at modern dunes -- for example, the Great
   Sand Dunes, White Sands, and Nebraska Sand Hills -- he or she will find
   an abundance of climbing translatent beds, with coarsening-up laminae
   and rare foreset laminae that form only by the migration and accretion
   of low-amplitude wind ripples in eolian environments.  Such beds form
   only in terrestrial eolian environments and are completely absent from
   marine or lacustrine environments because the wind ripples that create
   them simply do not form under water and underwater analogues of these
   sedimentary.  The fact that wind ripple and the distinctive bedding and
   laminations occur throughout the Coconino Sandstone and other similar
   strata -- for example, the Navajo and Entrada -- clearly refutes the
   marine hypothesis for their origin.


2. Sand waves deposited in water possess very low angle cross-beds, rarely
   steeper than 10 degrees.  Cross-bedding in eolian dunes occurs at
   various angles.  The general range in slope of the cross-beds is from
   11 to 34 degrees.  The average appears to be close to 25-28 degrees.
   The average slope of cross-bedding does not have to be equal to 30 to
   34 degrees, which is the maximum slope of dry sand, to be from a sand
   dune.  The maximum slope of cross-bedding within the Coconino Sandstone
   does get as steep as 30 to 34 degrees (McKee 1979; Reineck and Singh
   1980).  The 30-34 degree slope is produced from sand avalanching down
   the lee slip face of the dune.  The beds and laminae produced by wind
   ripple migration can form cross-bedding and lamination that has slopes
   up to 20 degrees within a sand dune.  Given that this cross-bedding is
   present everywhere in the Coconino Sandstone, it greatly decreases the
   average slope of the cross-bedding within the Coconino Sandstone.  In
   addition, grain-fall processes produce low, inclined lamination and
   beds with slopes that average between 20 to 30 degrees and range from 0
   to 40 degrees.  The presence of grain-fall bedding and lamination
   within the Coconino, not only refutes the hypotheses concerning the
   underwater or marine origin of the Coconino Sandstone but also again
   greatly decreases the average slope of the cross-bedding found in the
   Coconino Sandstone.  Thus, it is completely reasonable that the average
   slope of the cross-bedding in the Coconino Sandstone is less than the
   average slope of dry sand -- that is 30 to 34 degrees -- because the
   cascading of sand down the lee side of the sand dune is not the only
   process producing cross-beds and laminations in dune sands (Hunter
   1977).

Links:

References:

1. Hunter, R. E., 1977.  Basic types of stratification
   in small eolian dunes.  _Sedimentology_ 24: 361-387.
2. McKee, E. D., 1979.  A study of global sand seas: Ancient sandstones
   considered to be eolian.  _U. S. Geological Survey Professional Paper
   1052_, Reston, VA: USGS.
3. Reineck, H.-E. and I. B. Singh, 1980.  _Depositional Sedimentary
   Environments_, 2nd ed. Berlin: Spinger-Verlag.
#4. Walker, R. G. and N. P. James, eds., 1992.  _Facies Models, Response to
#   Sea Level Change_, Geological Association of Canada.

Further Reading:

Boggs, S., 1995.  _Principles of Sedimentology and Stratigraphy_. New
 York: Freeman and Co.

Date: 2003-6-23
