BriefClaim: Jurassic shells from mud springs are remarkably preserved.
Title: Pristine ammonite and bivavle fossils
Keywords: taphonomy, preservation, aragonite

Claim:

Mud springs near Swindon, Wiltshire, England produce fossils, supposedly
about 165 million years old, of remarkable preservation.  Some bivalves
still have their original organic ligaments, and ammonites are irridescent
and still have their original shells of aragonite, a metastable form of
calcium carbonate.

Source: 

Snelling, Andrew A.  1997.  A '165 million year’ surprise.  _Creation_
 19(2): 14-15.
 http://www.answersingenesis.org/creation/v19/i2/surprise.asp

Response:

1. The ammonites are well preserved but still consistent with an age of
   165 million years.  Although the microstrucure of the bivalve ligaments
   is preserved, their organic material is not.  Irridescent fossils are
   not uncommon from mudrocks of that age.  Dr. Hollingworth, cited
   secondhand in the source for this claim, wrote,

    "The bivalves found at the Wootton Bassett Mudspring come from the
     Upper Jurassic, Oxfordian Ampthill Clay Formation and are very well
     preserved. Several specimens of the bivalve Myophorella have been
     found articulated with the ligament still preserved and retaining
     original microstructure. The organic material has been replaced by
     hydroxyapatite. Aragonite is metastable but in mudrocks is sometimes
     still preserved due to the impermeable nature of the sediment,
     especially when compacted. (Hollingworth 2005; see also Harding et
     al. 2000)
 
Links:

References:

1. Harding, I. C., J. Armitage, N. Hollingworth, and N. Ainsworth.  2000.
   Sourcing mudsprings using integrated palaeontological analyses: An
   example from Wootton Bassett, Wiltshire, England.  _Geological Journal_
   35: 115-132.
2. Hollingworth, 2005.  Letter to Jon Fleming. In: Preservation of 165
   Mya organic ammonite ligaments?, talk.origins, May 2, 2005.

Further Reading:

Date: 2005-5-2
