-----BEGIN PGP SIGNED MESSAGE-----
Hash: SHA1


THE TALKORIGINS FOUNDATION, INC.
A Texas Nonprofit Corporation


MINUTES OF ANNUAL DIRECTORS MEETING
August 13, 2005


The TalkOrigins Foundation held its annual meeting of the Board of
Directors starting on April 22, 2004, and continuing from day to day
thereafter.  All directors (Wesley Elsberry, John Wilkins, and
Kenneth Fair) were present and participated by electronic mail as
allowed by Section 5.04 of the Bylaws.

At the meeting the following business was conducted:

1.  The Secretary (Kenneth Fair) presented a report on the
organization of the Foundation and the granting of tax-exempt status
by the IRS.  A copy of the report can be found at the following
location:

	http://www.talkorigins.org/foundation/corpdocs/SecRpt20050422.txt

2.  The Treasurer (Kenneth Fair) presented a report on the initial
funding of the Foundation and the amount raised by the initial
donation request.  A copy of the report can be found at the following
location:

	http://www.talkorigins.org/foundation/corpdocs/TreasRpt20050422.txt

3.  The Board held an election to fill the seat of Kenneth Fair,
whose term was expiring.  John Wilkins renominated Kenneth Fair to
fill the seat, which was seconded by Wesley Elsberry.  The vote was
2-0 in favor, with Kenneth Fair abstaining from the discussion and
vote.

4.  The Board discussed the need for additional bandwidth for hosting
The Panda's Thumb.  The Board asked the President to look into and
report back on options for hosting and the costs of each option.

5.  The Board discussed moving the domain for the Archive to
joker.com to align it with the other sites, and to transfer ownership
of the domains to the Foundation.  The Board voted 3-0 in favor of
the move.

6.  The Board discussed the possibility of setting up a system so
that individuals could make automatic recurring donations to the
Foundation.  The Board directed the Treasurer to look into the
possibility.

7.  The Board discussed the possibility of activating an "Amazon
Associates" account to receive money from click-throughs from the
Archive.  The Treasurer agreed to set up such an account.

All business having been concluded, the meeting was adjourned.


    /s/ Kenneth J. Fair
          Secretary, TalkOrigins Foundation

-----BEGIN PGP SIGNATURE-----
Version: PGP 8.0.2 - not licensed for commercial use: www.pgp.com

iQA/AwUBQv56ejz5KF0EZhfWEQJ6FACfYysRGeBDd+Kh52u95ddDWE/8xT0AnRx+
CBnMY7s/c71fBc4EorLpZxf5
=UHox
-----END PGP SIGNATURE-----
