From: Kenneth Fair <kenfair@earthling.net>
Date: April 22, 2005 7:46:43 AM CDT
To: Wesley Elsberry <welsberr@austringer.net>, John Wilkins <wilkins@wehi.edu.au>

-----BEGIN PGP SIGNED MESSAGE-----
Hash: SHA1

THE TALKORIGINS FOUNDATION, INC.
A Texas Nonprofit Corporation


SECRETARY'S REPORT
April 22, 2005


The primary focus of this report concerns the incorporation and setup
of the Foundation.  The Foundation received notice from the State of
Texas that it was incorporated as a Texas nonprofit corporation on
April 26, 2004.  The initial directors (Wesley Elsberry, John
Wilkins, and Kenneth Fair) then signed an organizing resolution in
lieu of an initial meeting.  The organizational resolution adopted
the bylaws, appointed officers, and organized the Foundation.  The
articles of incorporation, organizational resolution, and bylaws are
posted on the Foundation web site
(http://www.talkorigins.org/foundation).

The Internal Revenue Service was then contacted to seek exemption
from taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as
a scientific and educational organization.  This resulted in a
substantial delay in conducting Foundation business, as the IRS did
not respond to the exemption request until January 2005.  The IRS
then, on repeated occasions, sought additional information regarding
the Foundation's structure and business, which was provided.
Finally, in March 2005, the IRS granted the Foundation tax-exempt
status.  This status runs from January 1, 2005, and is provisional,
which simply means that the Foundation must fill out the form the IRS
will send in a few years to report on the Foundation, so as to
confirm that its activities are tax-exempt.  The correspondence with
the IRS will be posted on the Foundation web site shortly as soon as
I have a chance to scan it all in.

The only other issue for the Secretary to report on is the election
of directors and officers, which is on the agenda for the annual
meeting.  The directors are elected on a rotating basis, with one of
the three directors requiring election each year.  The term for
Kenneth Fair is expiring this year, and a director must be elected by
the other two directors to fill this seat.  Once that has been done,
the officers for the Foundation must be appointed for the forthcoming
year.


    /s/ Kenneth J. Fair
          Secretary, TalkOrigins Foundation

PGP Key ID: 0x046617D6



-----BEGIN PGP SIGNATURE-----
Version: PGP 8.0.2 - not licensed for commercial use: www.pgp.com

iQA/AwUBQmjkBjz5KF0EZhfWEQKguQCgkh6DjitgJ5kD9EknRXSbNPIXRwIAn2xz
MtnsOZV5X58OPocRNiUB32D4
=61/P
-----END PGP SIGNATURE-----

