From: Kenneth Fair <kenfair@earthling.net>
Date: April 22, 2005 8:21:33 AM CDT
To: Wesley Elsberry <welsberr@austringer.net>, John Wilkins <wilkins@wehi.edu.au>
Subject: Treasurer's Report

-----BEGIN PGP SIGNED MESSAGE-----
Hash: SHA1

THE TALKORIGINS FOUNDATION, INC.
A Texas Nonprofit Corporation


TREASURER'S REPORT
April 22, 2005


This report outlines the Foundation's financial situation and
dealings since its organization on April 26, 2004.  As the directors
are aware, the Foundation was dormant for much of this period while
awaiting a ruling from the Internal Revenue Service on the
Foundation's tax-exempt status.  That notice was finally received in
March 2005.

On April 2, 2005, the Foundation was opened to donations from the
public.  As authorized in the organizing resolution, the Treasurer
established a checking account with Hibernia Bank.  Hibernia was
selected because (1) it has a branch near the Treasurer, (2) it
offered a no-fee checking account for small businesses, and (3) it
allows for online banking.  The Treasurer also established an account
with Paypal.  Paypal was selected because (1) it is the most popular
online financial service, and can receive donations directly from
other Paypal account holders, (2) it can process credit card
donations from those who do not hold Paypal accounts, and (3) it
offers a money market return on funds deposited.

The Paypal money market return is currently 2.41% annually.
Donations via Paypal are subject to a 2.9% + $0.30 USD fee.  A small
additional fee is charged for international donations.

As of this writing, the Foundation has $2099.40.  Of this amount,
$670.00 is from donations sent by check to the Treasurer, while the
remainder is from donations to the Paypal account, less transaction
fees.  Over the three-week period since the Foundation started
receiving donations, the Foundation has received two donations for
$500, four donations of $100, and eighteen donations of under $100.
The pattern of donations is a bit difficult to assess, given the
short period of time since their receipt, but there seems to have
been two spikes correlating with the initial announcement of the
Foundation's accepting donations and the announcement to NCSE
members.

The Foundation has incurred one expense during this period: $23.46
for the checkbook for the Hibernia account.  This expense remains
outstanding and will be paid shortly.  Thus the Foundation's net
worth is currently $2075.94.  The Treasurer will post a complete
accounting report on the web site
(http://www.talkorigins.org/foundation) shortly.

In summary, the fiscal health of the Foundation appears to be strong
and sufficient to cover the basic expenses for hosting the
Talk.Origins Archive.  If the Foundation so desires, the funds should
also be available to help defray hosting costs for the Archive's
associated sites (TalkDesign and Panda's Thumb) for this year.

The Treasurer recommends reexamining the Foundation's fiscal status
at the end of May to get a better sense of the level of donations
over a longer time period, once any initial excitement may have
waned.


  /s/ Kenneth J. Fair
        Treasurer, TalkOrigins Foundation



-----BEGIN PGP SIGNATURE-----
Version: PGP 8.0.2 - not licensed for commercial use: www.pgp.com

iQA/AwUBQmjsLjz5KF0EZhfWEQLeAwCgidNdqhpZZ9I8BoxDxq19Zis6qSUAoLb2
W5sC+GkiLXhK1kqW062/UsSW
=5Yiz
-----END PGP SIGNATURE-----

