BriefClaim: Microevolution selects only existing variation.
Title: Microevolution and pre-existing variation
Keywords: mutation, microevolution, variation, selection, genetic drift.

Claim:

Microevolution (for example, the development of insecticide resistance)
merely selects preexisting variation.  It does not demonstrate that
mutations create new variation.

Source:

Wallace, Timothy, 2002.  Five major _evolutionist_ misconceptions about
 evolution.  https://web.archive.org/web/20080518113931if_/http://www.trueorigins.org/isakrbtl.asp


Response:

1. In experiments with bacteria, variation (including beneficial
   mutations) arises in populations that are grown from a single
   individual (Lederberg and Lederberg 1952).  Since the population started
   with just one chromosome, there was no variation in the original
   population; all variation must have come from mutations.

   Furthermore, disease organisms and insect pests have developed
   resistance to a variety of antibiotics and pesticides, many of them
   artificial and unlike anything in nature.  It is highly improbable that
   all insects were created with resistance to all pesticides.

2. Mutation is the only natural process that adds variation to
   populations.  Selection and genetic drift remove variation.  If
   mutations did not create new variation, there would now be little or no
   variation to select from.  In particular, reducing populations to a
   single pair of individuals, as Noah's Flood requires, would have
   removed very nearly all variation from the world's wildlife in one
   stroke.

3. It is true that much microevolution selects from preexisting variation.
   In animals, that kind of microevolution occurs much faster than waiting
   for certain mutations to occur, so we often see artificial selection
   programs stall when they have selected among all the variation that was
   there to begin with.  However, if the selection is maintained, change
   should continue, albeit at a much slower rate.


Links:

References:

1. Lederberg, J. and E. M. Lederberg, 1952. Replica plating and indirect
   selection of bacterial mutants. _Journal of Bacteriology_ 63: 399-406.

Further Reading:

True, Heather L. and Susan L. Lindquist, 2000.  A yeast
 prion provides a mechanism for genetic variation and phenotypic
 diversity.  _Nature_ 407: 477-483. (technical)

Date: 2001-2-17
