BriefClaim: Vestigial organs may have functions.
Title: Function of vestigial organs.
Keywords: vestigial.

Claim:

Practically all "vestigial" organs in man have been shown to have definite
uses and not to be vestigial at all.

Source:

SciCre, pp. 75-76.

Response:

1. "Vestigial" does not mean an organ is useless.  A vestige is a "trace or
   visible sign left by something lost or vanished" (G. & C. Merriam 1974,
   769).  Examples from biology include leg bones in snakes, eye remnants
   in blind cave fish (Yamamoto and Jeffery 2000), extra toe bones in
   horses, wing stubs on flightless birds and insects, and molars in
   vampire bats.  Whether these organs have functions is irrelevant.  They
   obviously do not have the function that we expect from such parts in
   other animals, for which creationists say the parts are "designed."

   Vestigial organs are evidence for evolution because we expect
   evolutionary changes to be imperfect as creatures evolve to adopt new
   niches.  Creationism cannot explain vestigial organs.  They are evidence
   against creationism if the creator follows a basic design principle
   that form follows function, as H. M. Morris himself expects (1974, 70).
   They are compatible with creation only if anything and everything is
   compatible with creation, making creationism useless and unscientific.

2. Some vestigial organs can be determined to be useless if experiments
   show that organisms with them survive no better than organisms without
   them.

Links:

Theobald, Douglas, 2004.  29+ Evidences for macroevolution:  Prediction
 2.1: Anatomical vestiges.
 http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/comdesc/section2.html#morphological_vestiges

References:

1. G. & C. Merriam. 1974.  _The Merriam-Webster Dictionary_.  New York:
   Simon & Schuster.
1. Morris, H., 1974.  (see above).
2. Yamamoto, Y. and W. R. Jeffery., 2000.  Central role for the lens in
   cave fish eye degeneration.  _Science_ 289: 631-633.

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-5-29
