BriefClaim: Evolution cannot explain consciousness.
Title: Evolution of consciousness
Keywords: consciousness, free will

Claim:

Evolution cannot explain consciousness or free will.

Source:

Johnson, Phillip, 1990. Evolution as dogma: The establishment of
 naturalism.  _First Things_, Oct. 1990, 15-22.
 http://www.arn.org/docs/johnson/pjdogma1.htm

Response:

1. This is an <CA100>argument from ignorance>.  Not knowing an explanation
   does not mean an explanation is impossible.  And since we are barely
   beginning to understand what consciousness is, it is not surprising
   that we would not have its origin worked out yet.

   In fact, preliminary explanations for the origin of consciousness have
   been proposed, although they are too complicated to try to summarize
   here (see Dennett 1991 and Minsky 1985).  Much more experimentation and
   refinement is needed before we have a full-fledged theory of the origin
   of consciousness, but we have more than enough to know that such a
   theory is possible.

2. A factor that likely contributes to the claim of consciousness's
   inexplicability is the fact that many people do not want a
   naturalistic explanation of consciousness, since a natural
   consciousness does not fit easily with a divine soul.  This threatens
   people's desire for a divine origin and immortality (but see Dennett
   1991, 430, for immortality of a naturalistic consciousness).  An
   examination of this point alone could fill a book.  However, suffice it
   to say,
    a. There is much evidence -- from genetic predispositions of behavior
       and personality, from brain injury studies, from brain imaging of
       healthy people -- that consciousness is naturalistic now.  A
       natural origin would not matter much beyond that.
    b. What we want has no bearing on what really is.

Links:

References:

1. Dennett, Daniel C., 1991.  _Consciousness Explained_.  Boston: Little,
   Brown and Company.
2. Minsky, M., 1985.  _The Society of Mind_.  New York: Simon & Schuster.

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-6-25
