BriefClaim: Dark moths increased in s. Britain after pollution control began.
Title: Peppered moths affected by mutagens
Keywords: peppered moth, Biston betularia, mutagenesis, pollution,industrial melanism

Claim:
                                                 
South of latitude 52 degrees north, melanism in the peppered moth showed no
correlation with sulphur dioxide concentration, and the proportion of dark
moths *increased* there after pollution control was introduced.
These observations are inconsistent with Kettlewell's explanation
that the spread of the dark moths was caused by natural selection resulting
from  selective predation.
                       
Source:

Wells, Jonathan, 1999.  Second thoughts about peppered moths.
 http://www.arn.org/docs/wells/jw_pepmoth.htm ,
 http://www.trueorigin.org/pepmoth1.asp
Wells, Jonathan, 2000. _Icons of Evolution_, Washington DC: Regnery
 Publishing Inc., pp. 144-146.
                                   
Response:

1. Wells (2000, 146) wrote:
    "R.C. Steward found a correlation between melanism and the
     concentration of sulfur dioxide (an airborne pollutant) north -- but
     not south -- of latitude 52 degrees north.

   The assertion that Steward found no correlation between melanism and
   the concentration of sulphur dioxide south of latitude 52 degrees north
   is simply false.  The correlation which Steward (1977) found between
   the proportion of dark moths and the concentration of sulphur dioxide
   (or, more accurately, its square-root) was highly significant both over
   England and Wales as a whole, and south of latitude 52 degrees north.

   What Steward in fact observed was that for 165 sites scattered over the
   *whole* of England and Wales, the square-root of the concentration of
   sulphur dioxide was the *most significantly* correlated with the
   proportion of dark moths out of the thirteen variables he tested.
   South of latitude 52 degrees north, however, the most significantly
   correlated variable was east-west location, rather than the square-root
   of sulphur dioxide concentration.

   It was nevertheless true that the correlations of *both* east-west
   location *and* square-root of sulphur dioxide concentration with
   the proportion of dark moths were highly significant *both* when
   *all* sites were included in his analysis *as well as* when
   only those south of the given latitude were included.

   According to Steward these observations supported an inference he had
   drawn from other results that
    "in the south of Britain non-industrial factors may be of greater
     importance in determining _carbonaria_ frequency than in the
     rest of Britain (1977, 239).

   But his reasoning here is hard to follow.  In the midlands and north of
   England, most of the major industrial centres are located towards the
   west, whereas in the south they are located in the east, near London.
   In the south-west, the counties of Somerset, Dorset, Cornwall and Devon
   are among the *least* polluted in the whole of England and Wales.
   Moreover, in the north and midlands the prevailing south-westerly winds
   carry airborne pollution long distances towards the east.  It is
   therefore hardly surprising, if Kettlewell's explanation is valid, that
   the proportion of dark moths correlates more strongly with east-west
   location and less strongly with sulphur dioxide concentration in the
   south than it does in the north.

   Not content with merely taking Steward's shaky argument at face value,
   however, Wells (2000, 146) badly misquotes him when he writes:
     
    "Steward concluded that "in the south of Britain non-industrial
     factors may be of greater importance" than camouflage and bird
     predation.

   This clearly misrepresents the quoted statment of Steward's as
   referring to a comparison of non-industrial factors with camouflage and
   bird predation, whereas his actual comparison was between
   non-industrial factors in the south and those *same factors* in the
   north.

   Had Wells omitted the quotation marks, the resulting indirect quotation
   could perhaps have been justified as a paraphrase of something which
   Steward did say earlier in his article (1977, 238):

      "The results suggest that, although selective predation may have an
       important secondary effect on _carbonaria_ frequency, it is not the
       major factor determining frequencies at these sites.

   "These sites" here refers to 52 sites, of which 48 were located south
   of latitude 52 degrees north, where Steward had studied the effects of
   camouflage on rates of predation.  Also, "the results" being referred
   to are those from this study of the effects of camouflage, not those
   from the study of correlation between melanism and other variables.

   Nevertheless, even this tentative suggestion of Steward's seems to have
   been unwarranted.  Mani (1990) showed that the observed relative
   proportions of the three varieties of peppered moth could be well
   accounted for using no more than experimentally determined rates of
   visual predation and migration, and strengths of non-visual selection
   estimated from field data (see the <CB601_2_2>response
   to claim CB601.2.2>).

2. The increase in the proportion of dark moths mentioned in the claim
   appears to be a phenomenon for which no explanation has yet been
   presented in the scientific literature.  Bishop and Cook (1980, 398)
   merely say "The reason is not obvious".  Nevertheless, there is a quite
   plausible (but as yet speculative) explanation in terms of cline
   dynamics, which is outlined below.

   The increase in question was first pointed out by Lees and Creed (1975,
   71, 78). They noted that at a large number of locations south-west of a
   line running north-west from roughly just south of London to north-east
   Wales, the proportion of dark moths increased over the period from the
   mid 1950s to about 1970, while at most locations north-east of this
   line it decreased.  Note that the line separating these regions of
   increase and decrease was not, as claimed by Wells (2000, 145), the
   same line of latitude 50 degrees north that was associated with the
   phenomenon discussed above in relation to the first part of the
   claim. Most of the increases and decreases were quite small---Lees and
   Creed noted that they were not statistically significant at most of the
   individual locations considered in isolation.  However, when the
   figures from individual locations were combined to form a total net
   increase south-west of the line, and a total net decrease north-east of
   it, the results were highly significant.

   As noted in the response to claim <CB601_2_2>CB601.2.2>, peppered moths
   over most of England and Wales form a series of *clines* -- namely,
   populations over extended areas whose compositions varied from place to
   place.  It is very possible that the cline extending from south-west
   England and Wales to north-east England and East Anglia was not in
   equilibrium when pollution controls were introduced there starting from
   the late 1950s.  If this were the case, the proportion of dark peppered
   moths would have then been increasing over large portions of the cline.
   The first crucial point here is that while this disequilibrium towards
   increasing dark moth proportions would *start* to decrease not long
   after the introduction of pollution controls, it would not have
   *disappeared* immediately.  Thus, the proportion of dark moths would
   have continued to increase for a short time until the disequilibrium
   was reduced to zero.  The population would then pass through a
   transient equilibrium into a disequilibrium in the opposite direction.
   The proportion of dark moths in the population would only then start to
   decrease.

   The second crucial point is that there is no reason why the various
   parts of the population should have all passed through the stage of
   transient equilibrium at the same time.  Lees and Creed's observation
   (op. cit.) would seem to indicate that the population to the north-east
   of their dividing line had already passed through this equilibrium by
   the end of the period covered by their data, while that to the
   south-west of it had not.

   While this explanation remains as yet speculative, it is by no means
   contrived, and is, at least partially, testable.  The mathematical
   models of Mani (1982, 1990), referred to in the responses to
   <CB601_2>CB601.2>, <CB601_2_1>CB601.2.1>, and <CB601_2_2>CB601.2.2>,
   are not sensitive enough in their current form to reproduce the
   frequency variations seen in the phenomenon noted by Lees and Creed.
   However, if the explanation proposed above is correct, it should be
   possible to make plausible minor modifications to one of Mani's models
   which would cause it to do so.  Thus, if it were to be found that no
   such modified version of any of Mani's models could be made to do this,
   then the proposed explanation would be disconfirmed. Conversely, if the
   observed frequency variations *could* be reproduced by such a modified
   model, then that would provide some (admittedly fairly weak) support
   for the explanation.

Links:

References:

1. Lees, D. R. and E. R. Creed, 1975.  Industrial melanism in _Biston
   betularia_: the role of selective predation.  _J. Anim. Ecol._ 44:
   67-83.
2. Mani, G. S., 1982.  A theoretical analysis of the morph frequency
   variation in the peppered moth over England and Wales.
   _Biol. J. Linn. Soc._ 17: 259-267.
3. Mani, G. S., 1990.  Theoretical models of melanism in _Biston betularia_
   -- a review.  _Biol. J. Linn. Soc._ 39: 355-371.
4. Steward, R. C., 1977.  Industrial and non-industrial melanism in the
   peppered moth, _Biston betularia_ (L.), _Ecological Entomology_ 2:
   231-243.

Further Reading:

Grant, Bruce S., 1999.  Fine tuning the peppered moth paradigm.
 _Evolution_ 53(3): 980-984.
  https://web.archive.org/web/20011109061143if_/http://www.wm.edu/biology/melanism.pdf

Date: 2003-9-10
