BriefClaim: Evolution predicts a continuum of organisms, not discrete kinds.
Title: Kinds: Continuous or discrete
Keywords: phylogeny

Claim:

Since evolution says organisms came from a common ancestor and since they
lived in a continuity of environments, we should see a continuum of
organisms.  There should be a continuous series of animals between cats
and dogs, so that one could not tell where cats left off and dogs began.

Source:

SciCre, pp. 70-71.

Response:

1. The claim might be true if there were no such thing as extinction. But
   since species do become extinct, intermediates that once existed do not
   exist today. Since extinction is a one-way street, species can only
   become less connected over time. This is clear if we look at the fossil
   record, in which early members of separate groups are much harder to
   tell apart.

2. Environments (and ecological niches) are not really as continuous as the
   claim pretends. Dogs bring down their prey through long chases, and
   cats ambush their prey; dogs are made for long-distance running, and
   cats are made for short sprints with high acceleration from a standing
   start. These requirements are quite different, and it is hard to achieve
   both in a single body. Compromises between the two have disadvantages
   in competition with specialists for either type, and thus natural
   selection culls them.  Intermediates are competitive only so long as
   specialists are absent; so when specialists evolve, the intermediates
   are likely to become extinct.

3. In part, distinctness is an illusion caused by our choice of which
   groups to give names to. Groups with unclear boundaries tend not to get
   separate names, or groups in which intermediate forms exist are chopped
   in half arbitrarily (especially obvious if fossil forms are considered;
   e.g., the line between <CC214>dinosaurs and birds> is arbitrary,
   increasingly so as new fossils are discovered).

4. There are indeed several cases of continua in nature.  In many groups,
   such as some grasses and leafhoppers, different species are very hard
   to tell apart.  At least ten percent of bird species are similar enough
   to another species to produce fertile hybrids (Weiner 1994, 198-199).
   The most obvious continua are called ring species, because in the
   classic case (the herring gull complex) they form a ring around the
   North Pole. If we start in Western Europe and move west, similar
   populations, capable of interbreeding, succeed each other
   geographically. When we have traveled all the way around the world and
   reach Western Europe again, the final population is different enough
   that we call it a separate species, and it is incapable of
   interbreeding with herring gulls, even though they are connected by a
   continuous chain of interbreeding populations. This is a big problem
   for creationists. We expect kinds to be easily determined if they were
   created separately, but there are no such obvious divisions:

    "They are mistaken, who repeat that the greater part of our species
     are clearly limited, and that the doubtful species are in a feeble
     minority. This seemed to be true, so long as a genus was imperfectly
     known, and its species were founded upon a few specimens, that is to
     say, were provisional. Just as we come to know them better,
     intermediate forms flow in, and doubts as to specific limits
     augment. (de Condolle, quoted in Darwin, 1872, chap. 2)

Links:

References:

1. Darwin, C., 1872.  _The Origin of Species_, 1st Edition.  Senate,
   London.  http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/origin.html
2. Weiner, Jonathan, 1994.  _The Beak of the Finch: a story of evolution
   in our time_.  New York: Knopf.

Further Reading:

Hazard, Evan B.  1998.  Teaching about "intermediate forms."  _The
 American Biology Teacher_ 60(5): 359-361.

Darwin, C., 1859.  _The Origin of Species_, 1st Edition.  Senate, London.
 http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/origin/chapter4.html

Date: 2003-4-26, 2006-4-23
