BriefClaim: Homologous structures are not produced by homologous genes.
Title: Homologous structures and genes
Keywords: homology, common descent, genotype, phenotype

Claim:

Evolutionist Gavin de Beer (1971) has shown that homologous structures
arise from different, nonhomologous genes, which means that they cannot be
derived from common ancestors.

Source:

Kofahl, Robert E., 2003.  Handy dandy evolution refuter, chpt. 10.
 <http://www.parentcompany.com/handy_dandy/hder10.htm>

Response:

1. It was 1971 when de Beer made his argument.  That was before technology
   for manipulating DNA made it possible to examine genes directly, so de
   Beer's conclusions (and those of Hardy 1965, making essentially the
   same argument) were based on indirect evidence.  Since then, many
   similar genes have been found to participate in the development of
   homologous structures (see, e.g., Carroll 2005).

   Granted, some of the examples raised by de Beer have not yet been
   explained in detail.  For example, some organs considered homologous
   arise from different layers of embryological tissues.  But although
   such cases are not explained, that does not mean they are
   unexplainable.  We now know that organs can be stimulated to grow in
   many parts of the body (such as eyes growing on a fly's wings) simply
   by ensuring that the proper signalling chemicals are present.  Thus
   homologous organs arising from different areas may result simply from
   mutations in where signalling proteins are expressed.

   The difference in <CB731>finger development> between birds and theropod
   dinosaurs shows an example of how a small difference in development can
   lead to a nonobvious difference in adult form.

Links:

References:

1. Carroll, Sean B. 2005.  _Endless Forms Most Beautiful_.  New York:
   W. W. Norton.
2. de Beer, Gavin. 1971.  Homology, an unsolved problem.  _Oxford Biology
   Readers_, J.J. Head and O.E. Lowenstein, eds., Oxford University Press.
   Reprinted (abridged) in Ridley, Mark, 1997.  _Evolution_.  Oxford
   University Press, 211-221.
3. Hardy, Alister. 1965.  _The Living Stream_, New York: Harper & Row,
   pp. 209-219.


Further Reading:

Carroll, Sean B. 2005.  _Endless Forms Most Beautiful_.  New York:
 W. W. Norton.

Date: 2005-5-23
