BriefClaim: Microevolution is distinct from macroevolution.
Title: Microevolution vs. Macroevolution
Keywords: microevolution, macroevolution, speciation.

Claim:

Microevolution is distinct from macroevolution.

Source:

Wallace, Timothy, 2002.  Five major _evolutionist_ misconceptions about
 evolution.  https://web.archive.org/web/20080518113931if_/http://www.trueorigins.org/isakrbtl.asp

Response:

1. Microevolution and macroevolution are different things, but they
   involve mostly the same processes.  Microevolution is defined as the
   change of allele frequencies (that is, genetic variation due to
   processes such as selection, mutation, genetic drift, or even
   migration) within a population.  There is no argument that
   microevolution happens (although some creationists, such as Wallace,
   deny that mutations happen).  Macroevolution is defined as evolutionary
   change at the species level or higher, that is, the formation of new
   species, new genera, and so forth.  <CB910>Speciation> has also been
   observed.

   Creationists have created another category for which they use the word
   "macroevolution."  They have no technical definition of it, but in
   practice they use it to mean evolution to an extent great enough that
   it has not been observed yet.  (Some creationists talk about
   macroevolution being the emergence of new features, but it is not clear
   what they mean by this.  Taking it literally, gradually changing a
   feature from fish fin to tetrapod limb to bird wing would not be
   macroevolution, but a mole on your skin which neither of your parents
   have would be.)  I will call this category supermacroevolution to avoid
   confusing it with real macroevolution.

   Speciation is distinct from microevolution in that speciation usually
   requires an isolating factor to keep the new species distinct.  The
   isolating factor need not be biological; a new mountain range or the
   changed course of a river can qualify.  Other than that, speciation
   requires no processes other than microevolution.  Some processes such
   as disruptive selection (natural selection that drives two states of
   the same feature further apart) and polyploidy (a mutation that
   creates copies of the entire genome), may be involved more often in
   speciation, but they are not substantively different from
   microevolution.

   Supermacroevolution is harder to observe directly.  However, there is
   not the slightest bit of evidence that it requires anything but
   microevolution.  Sudden large changes probably do occur rarely, but
   they are not the only source of large change.  There is no reason to
   think that small changes over time cannot add up to large changes,
   and every reason to believe they can.  Creationists claim that
   microevolution and supermacroevolution are distinct, but they have
   never provided an iota of evidence to support their claim.

2. There is evidence for supermacroevolution in the form of progressive
   changes in the fossil record and in the pattern of similarities among
   living things showing an absence of distinct "kinds."  This evidence
   caused evolution in some form to be accepted even before Darwin
   proposed his theory.


Links:

References:

Further Reading:

Wilkins, John, 1997.  Macroevolution. 
 http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/macroevolution.html

Date: 2000-11-4, 2004-2-26
