BriefClaim: Three planets and several moons revolve backwards.
Title: Retrograde planets and moons
Keywords: nebular hypothesis, solar system

Claim:

The hypothesis that the solar system formed from the collapse of a
revolving nebula is contradicted by the fact that three planets and
several moons revolve backwards.

Source:

Brown, Walt, 1995.  _In the Beginning: Compelling evidence for creation
 and the Flood_.  Phoenix, AZ: Center for Scientific Creation, p. 19.

Response:

1. The "backwards" planets and moons are in no way contrary to the nebular
   hypothesis.  Part of the hypothesis is that the nebula of gas and dust
   would accrete into planetessimals.  Catastrophic collisions between
   these would be part of planet building.  Such collisions and other
   natural processes can account for the retrograde planets and moons.

   The only moons that orbit retrograde are small asteroid-sized distant
   satellites of giant planets such as Jupiter and Saturn, plus Triton
   (Neptune's large moon) and Charon (Pluto's satellite).  The small
   retrograde satellites of Jupiter and Saturn were probably asteroids
   captured by the giant planets long after formation of the solar system.
   It is actually easier to be captured into a retrograde orbit.  The
   Neptune system also contains one moon, Nereid, with a highly eccentric
   orbit.  It appears that some sort of violent capture event may have
   taken place.  The Pluto-Charon system is orbiting approximately "on its
   side," technically retrograde, with tidally locked rotation.  As these
   are small bodies in the outer solar system, and binaries are likely to
   have been formed through collisions or gravitational capture, this does
   not violate the nebular hypothesis.

   Uranus is rotating more or less perpendicular to the plane of the
   ecliptic.  This may be the result of an off-center collision between
   two protoplanets during formation.  Venus is rotating retrograde but
   extremely slowly, with its axis almost exactly perpendicular to the
   plane of its orbit.  The rotation of this planet may well have started
   out prograde, but solar and planetary tides acting on its dense
   atmosphere have been shown to be a likely cause of the present state of
   affairs.  It is probably not a coincidence that at every inferior
   conjunction, Venus turns the same side toward Earth, as Earth is the
   planet that contributes most to tidal forces on Venus.

2. Orbital motions account for 99.9% of the angular momentum of the solar
   system.  A real evidential problem would be presented if some of the
   planets orbited the sun in the opposite direction to others, or in very
   different planes.  However, all the planets orbit in the same
   direction, confirming the nebular hypothesis, and nearly in the same
   plane.  A further confirmation comes from the composition of the giant
   planets, which are similar to the sun's composition of hydrogen and
   helium.  Giant planets could hold on to all of their light elements,
   but small planets like Earth and Mars could not.

Links:

References:

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-5-12
