BriefClaim: Retrograde motion of planets disproves the big bang.
Title: Retrograde planets and the big bang
Keywords: retrograde motion, big bang, angular momentum.

Claim:

If the spin of planets, galaxies, etc., came from the fact that the big
bang matter was spinning when it blew up, then the conservation of angular
momentum demands that all planets be spinning in the same direction.
Since some planets and moons spin in a retrograde motion, the big bang is
disproved.

Source:

All About GOD Ministries, 2002.  Big bang theory.  
 https://web.archive.org/web/20250914031613if_/http://www.big-bang-theory.com/

Response:

1. The claim is based on so much ignorance and so many misunderstandings
   that it is hard to know where to begin.
    a. The big bang was not an explosion.  Space itself expanded (and is
       still expanding).
    b. The big bang is quite a different subject from the formation of
       solar systems.  Rotations within the universe are not expected to
       be related to any rotation of the cosmos.  Galaxies probably arose
       from slightly denser regions of the early universe, which coalesced
       and combined due to gravitational and viscous interactions.  Since
       these early density fluctuations were apparently random, we expect
       galaxies to have random orientations.  Solar systems within
       galaxies have still different origins and additional random
       influences on their orientations.
    c. Conservation of angular momentum doesn't require that everything
       spin the same way.  It requires that a change in spin in one object
       be compensated for by an opposite change in spin in one or more
       other objects.  <CE260>Retrograde planets> are not a violation
       of angular momentum because other bodies in the early solar system
       could account for the compensating spin.

2. If the big bang were an explosion, we would *expect* different spins.
   When something explodes, pieces fly out spinning in all directions.

Links:

References:

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-9-7, 2004-2-15
