BriefClaim: God is all-good.
Title: Good God
Keywords: theodicy, theology, evil

Claim:

God is all-good.  Therefore, we should all worship and follow Him.

Source:

Response:

1. This claim is not an argument for creationism or against evolution.
   Evolution is entirely compatible with a good God.

2. God's omnibenevolence usually goes along with claims that He is
   all-knowing and all-powerful.  But the three qualities are not
   compatible with the observation that there is suffering in the world.

3. The same God that people consider all-good is credited with creating
   hell and banishing there all souls who do not accept Him.  Allowing
   anyone to suffer ultimate torment for all eternity--particularly when
   it is within your power to prevent it--is arguably the greatest form of
   evil possible.  The only point to causing pain and suffering with no
   chance of redemption is petty cruelty.

   Forcing someone to suffer for not returning your love is cruel,
   spiteful and petty.  Society considers such behavior evil enough to
   enact laws to prevent it.

   Causing one person to suffer for eternity (even for a truly heinous
   crime) is bad enough.  Causing billions of people to suffer for
   eternity (especially when most are guilty of nothing more than never
   having been taught the "true" religion) can only be considered vastly
   more sick, depraved and evil.

4. The Bible itself says God created evil ("I form the light, and create
   darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I the LORD do all these
   things."--Isa. 45:7).  Genesis 2 says the tree of knowledge of good and
   evil existed in Eden before Adam and Eve interacted with it, implying
   that evil existed from the beginning.  And God pronounced it good.

Links:

References:

Further Reading:

Cauthen, Kenneth, 2001.  Theodicy: A heterodox alternative.
 http://www.frontiernet.net/~kenc/theodicy2.htm

Livingstone, David N., 1984.  _Darwin's Forgotten Defenders: The encounter
 between Evangelical theology and evolutionary thought_.  Vancouver, BC:
 Regent College Publishing.

Date: 2003-5-29, 2004-4-5
