BriefClaim: Genesis is foundational to the Bible.
Title: Primacy of Genesis
Keywords: Bible, interpretation

Claim:

True science and true religion are founded on Genesis.  All Biblical
doctrines have their foundations laid there, and the book of Genesis
itself is founded on the events of its first chapter.

Source:

Morris, Henry M. 1983.  Creation is the foundation.  _Impact_ 126 (Dec.).
 http://www.icr.org/index.php?module=articles&action=view&ID=218

Response:

1. This claim is an instance of religious bigotry.  Lots of religions,
   including Buddhism, Hinduism, Druidism, and many more, have no
   connection with Genesis at all.  For a person to say that these are not
   true religions is
    - a gross insult to the people who practice the religions.  Many of
      these people are highly devout, with a spiritual relationship at
      least as great as any creationist.
    - a gross insult to God.  The person is saying that God's revelation
      must coincide with his own opinion to be valid, that God cannot
      reveal himself differently to different people.  Anyone making this
      claim places themself above God.
    - a disservice to oneself.  Bigotry is hateful and will prevent good
      relationships with good people.

2. If Genesis is so all-important, why do creationists reject serious
   study of it?  Modern (and even not-so-modern) scholarship has revealed
   much about the authors of Genesis (called J, E, P, and R) and other
   books of the Old Testament, including their motivations and places in
   history.  For example, the Flood account is an interleaving of two
   different flood stories by J and P (Friedman 1987).  Creationists
   studiously avoid any such knowledge.  (Creationists are not alone in
   this; most Christians generally are woefully ignorant of biblical
   scholarship.)

3. Ideas in other parts of the Bible stand on their own.  Creationists
   themselves frequently quote them out of context.  The Old Testament
   itself refers to documents that no longer exist; the Book of the Wars
   of the Lord (Num. 21:14); the Book of Jasher (Josh. 10:13, 2
   Sam. 1:18); and others (1 Kings 11:41; 14:29, 19, 16:5; 1 Chron. 29:29;
   2 Chron. 20:34, 13:22).  Knowledge of earlier scriptures is helpful but
   not critical.  Jesus sometimes rejected the letter of some Old
   Testament laws, so the letter of the Old Testament cannot be too
   important, and Jesus exemplified the spirit.  The reason creationists
   find Genesis so important is because they depend on it, not because
   other parts of the Bible depend on it.

3. If one believes that God created the earth and heavens, then surely the
   earth and heavens are God's primary work.  Study of the earth and
   heavens should be foundational.  Placing an object such as the Bible
   before them is idolatry.

4. No accepted science has ever been based on the Bible.  That is not
   for lack of trying.  Up to the nineteenth century, serious scientists
   tried to accomodate literal readings of the Bible to what they saw in
   nature.  Young-earth creationism failed early on, so scientists tried
   gap creationism, day-age creationism, and other attempted
   reconciliations.  But purely Bible-based science has always failed.
   True science is based on reality as expressed in the world (Young
   1988).

Links:

References:

1. Friedman, R. E., 1987. (see below)
2. Young, Davis A., 1988.  _Christianity and the Age of the Earth_.
   Thousand Oaks, CA: Artisan Sales.

Further Reading:

Friedman, Richard Elliott, 1987.  _Who Wrote the Bible?_  New York:
 Summit Books.

Date: 2003-8-12, 2003-9-13

