BriefClaim: The Bible specifies good medical and hygienic practices.
Title: Bible describes good hygiene.
Keywords: Biblical accuracy

Claim:

The Bible describes medical and sanitary practices remarkable for the
time.  It says you should bury your excrement (Deut. 23:13).  It requires
people to wash themselves after touching a dead body (Numbers 19:11-22).
It notes that the eighth day after birth is the <CH135.1>safest time to
perform circumcisions> (Gen. 17:12; Lev. 12:2-3).

Source:

LifeHow, p. 204-206.

Response:

1. Accuracy on one point does not show overall accuracy.  Genesis
   30:25-33, for example, describes a breeding program based on
   sympathetic magic.

2. Deuteronomy 23:9-14 is not about hygiene.  The purpose of burying
   excrement is so God will not be offended by seeing anything indecent
   and turn away.  The idea is religious; uncleanliness would make one
   unfit for a religious war.  There is also a danger that exposed
   excrement could be found by the enemy and used magically against one
   (Scott 1979).

   Numbers 19:11-22 is not about hygiene.  It refers to ritual purification
   conducted by sprinkling water, not washing with it.  The purification is
   to be done not immediately after touching the body, as good health
   practice would demand, but on the third and seventh days.  Whoever
   fails to perform the ritual is unclean and must be ostracized from
   Israel.  Basically, it is a superstitious taboo.  Similar taboos
   against people who have touched dead bodies appear to be universal in
   Polynesia (Frazer 1993, 206).  Furthermore, unless they have died
   from pestilence or have been decaying for a few days, dead bodies are
   no less clean than live ones.

3. The Bible does not include directives that really would indicate good
   medical practices, such as burying feces downhill from the source for
   drinking water, and washing ones hands in clean water in circumstances
   that really would prevent spreading dangerous germs.

4. Attributing a requirement of some special knowledge to account for
   knowledge of good health practices assumes the ancient Hebrews were
   idiots.  People can often see the results that come from bad practices.

Links:

References:

1. Frazer, Sir James, 1993.  _The Golden Bough_.  Ware, Hertfordshire:
   Wordsworth.
3. Scott, D. Russell, 1979.  Deuteronomy.  In: _The Abingdon Bible
   Commentary_, Eiselen, C., E. Lewis and D. G. Downey, eds., New York:
   Abingdon Press.  Citing Frazer, _Golden Bough_ vol. i, pp. 327f.

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-7-11
