BriefClaim: We can expect to find Noah's ark on Mount Ararat.
Title: Noah's Ark on Mt. Ararat
Keywords: Noah's Ark, Ararat, Agra Dagi, arkeology.

Claim:

We can expect to find Noah's ark on Mount Ararat.

Source:

LaHaye, Tim and John Morris, 1976. _The Ark on Ararat_, Nashville: Thomas
 Nelson Inc. and Creation Life Publishers.

Response:

1. Mount Ararat (known locally as Agri Dagi) is very likely the wrong
   place to look.  Genesis says only that the Ark landed on the mountains
   of Ararat, where Ararat is not a single mountain but a region (2 Kings
   19:37, Isa. 37:38, Jer. 51:27).  That region, known in Assyrian records
   as Urartu, is, roughly, bounded on the west by the Euphrates River, on
   the south by the western Taurus Mountains (northern Iraq), somewhat
   east of Lake Urmia, and north to include the plain of the Araxes River.
   "The mountains of Ararat" implies not a single peak, but a mountainous
   region within this area, such as the Qardu region (northern Kurdistan)
   west of Lake Urmia.  Early reports of the ark place it on several
   different mountains, including some in the Qardu region.  Mount Ararat
   is not mentioned as a landing site until the eleventh or twelfth
   century (Bailey 1989, 61-82).

2. No wooden structure, including the ark, should be expected to survive
   intact after 4,500 years.  The weather on Ararat is harsh and
   changeable; it would have destroyed the ark if it were exposed.  Some
   people claim that the ark could have survived in a glacier, protected
   by the covering ice, but this also is unlikely.  First, the ice would
   have crushed the ark.  Second, glaciers flow, carrying along whatever
   is inside them.  Different parts often flow at different rates, which
   would deform the ark.  And the ark started on the ground, so it would
   have been eroded as the glacier dragged it over the rocks.

Links:

References:

1. Bailey, 1989, see below.

Further Reading:

Bailey, Lloyd, 1989.  _Noah: The Person and the Story in History and
 Tradition_.  Columbia: University of South Carolina Press.

Date: 2001-3-31
