BriefClaim: All kinds could fit.
Title: Fitting animals aboard the Ark
Keywords: Noah's Ark

Claim:

Noah's ark could have carried pairs of all kinds of animals for a year.

Source:

Woodmorappe, John, 1996.  _Noah's Ark: A Feasibility Study_, Santee,
 CA: ICR.

Response:

1. Woodmorappe (1996, 1-44) has done a detailed analysis of the
   possibility of fitting all animals aboard the Ark.  He found that the
   animals, together with the food and water they require, would fit in
   about 90 percent of the available space.  However, he made several
   invalid assumptions that, when corrected, fill the ark past overflowing
   (Isaak 1998).

    - The "kinds" used in Woodmorappe's calculations were genera.  Taking
      individual species, which is a much more reasonable definition of
      kind in the context of the ark, increases the load three- or
      fourfold.

    - Woodmorappe did not account for the extra clean animals,
      considering their number negligible.  However, he believed that the
      only clean animals would be thirteen domestic ruminants
      traditionally considered clean.  But if the Bible is taken
      literally, all ruminants would be considered clean.  Under
      Woodmorappe's assumption, the extra clean animals would increase the
      load by 1.5 percent, or 3 percent if you include seven pairs of the
      animals.  Taking all ruminants increases the load by 14 or 28
      percent.

    - Woodmorappe included only <CH512.1>juveniles> of animals larger than
      about 10 kg.  This assumption, however, is unbiblical and, for some
      animals, impractical.  Taking adult animals would increase the
      total mass more than thirteenfold.  Taking even some of these
      animals as adults or taking older juveniles could easily fill the
      ark beyond capacity.

    - According to the creation model, dinosaurs and other animals now
      extinct would have been alive at the time of the flood and
      therefore would be aboard the ark.  The only extinct animals that
      Woodmorappe included in his calculations were the ones that were
      known at the time.  Since then, many other dinosaur genera have
      been discovered, and no doubt there are many more as yet
      undiscovered.

    - Woodmorappe <CH511>excluded land invertebrates> from his
      calculations, despite the fact that they must have been aboard the
      ark.  These animals are small enough that they alone would not
      have increased the load significantly, but they are numerous enough
      and have many special requirements, so the infrastructure needed to
      house and care for them would have been significant.

    - Woodmorappe made no allowance for food spoilage or water wasted
      from spilling, although the conditions he described aboard the ark
      guarantee that both of these problems would have been severe.

Links:

Isaak, Mark, 1998.  Problems with a global flood, 2nd edition.
 http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/faq-noahs-ark.html

References:

1. Isaak, Mark, 1998.  (see above)
2. Woodmorappe, John, 1996. (see above)

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-5-14
