BriefClaim: The crew could feed and care for the animals.
Title: Noah's manpower
Keywords: Noah's Ark

Claim:

The eight-person crew aboard Noah's ark was sufficient to feed and care
for all the animals.

Source:

Woodmorappe, John, 1996.  _Noah's Ark: A Feasibility Study_, Santee,
 CA: ICR, pp. 71-81.

Response:

1. Three hundred and twenty full-time employees are needed to care for
   fewer than 3000 animals at the Washington National Zoo (Grimaldi and
   Barker 2003).  Granted, many of these would be working on
   administration and visitor concerns that would not have existed on the
   ark.  Still, assuming that only a quarter of them cared for animals,
   that is still eighty people to care for 3000 animals.  On the ark,
   there were eight people to tend more than 15,000 animals (assuming
   Noah's crew were not needed to do maintenance and bail water).  They
   would have had to work more than fifty times harder than professional
   zookeepers.  Double shifts are not enough to make up the difference.

   Accepting Woodmorappe's number of 15,754 animals aboard the ark, and
   assuming the crew attended to them sixteen hours per day (a very
   generous assumption), each animal would receive an average of about
   thirty seconds of attention per day for all its needs.

2. Labor-saving mechanisms proposed by Woodmorappe are unrealistic.  For
   example:
    - Watering many animals at once via troughs would not work on a ship.
      Most of the water would slosh out as the ark rolled with the waves.
    - Automatic feeders would allow pests to infest the food.  Animals
      with automatic feeders would probably eat more and waste more food,
      too, increasing the amount of food that must be stored.  Woodmorappe
      did not account for the extra space required.
    - At least one third, and probably two thirds, of the manure could not
      be disposed of by simply pushing it overboard, since it would be
      below the water line.  The manure would have to be carried up a deck
      or two.

3. Woodmorappe did not consider some time-consuming tasks:
    - The ark itself must be maintained.  It would be a miracle if bailing
      alone were less than a full-time job.
    - All of the hoofed animals would need to have their hooves trimmed
      several times during the year (Batten 1976, 39-42).

Links:

References:

1. Batten, R. Peter, 1976.  _Living trophies_. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell
   Co. 
2. Grimaldi, James V. and Karlyn Barker, 2003.  Spelman's style polarizing
   zoo employees.  _Washington Post_, April 28, 2003; Page A01.
   http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A46238-2003Apr27.html

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-5-7, 2003-7-12
