BriefClaim: Many animals do not require fresh or live food.
Title: Noah's animals: Specialized needs
Keywords: Noah's Ark, noachian deluge

Claim:

Although a few animals have specialized food needs, such animals are rare,
the needs are often exaggerated, and the specialized diets are not labor
or space intensive.  In short, the specialized dietary needs of animals do
not prevent the voyage of Noah's ark from being feasible.

Source:

Woodmorappe, John, 1996.  _Noah's Ark: A Feasibility Study_, Santee,
 CA: ICR, pp. 111-117.

Response:

1. Woodmorappe did not consider all animals with special needs.  Just
   because some snakes can be coaxed to eat nonliving food, for example,
   does not mean all can.

   Most problematical, Woodmorappe did not consider terrestrial
   invertebrates, especially insects, which <CH511>must have been on the
   ark>.  Many insects only eat a single species of plant.  Keeping all
   the plants alive for a year would have taken considerable resources.

2. Some animals' needs may be exaggerated, but Woodmorappe grossly
   exaggerated how easy it would be to deal with them.  Many animals, such
   as the platypus, are difficult to keep alive during transport even in
   the best of conditions (Fleay 1958).  Noah could give hardly any
   attention to individual animals and would have had to keep them in nigh
   intolerable conditions.  Modern livestock shipping often results in
   high casualty rates, even though only domestic animals are shipped, and
   they are at sea only a few weeks.

3. Woodmorappe noted that some animals can be fed artificial diets.  He
   failed to note that the artificial diets were developed by the work of
   hundreds of researchers working over tens to hundreds of years.  Noah
   would not have had that knowledge to draw upon.

4. Some of Woodmorappe's solutions to feeding problems have problems of
   their own.  He proposed feeding insectivores by breeding insects on
   grain in special compartments, and letting the insects escape into the
   cages of the insectivores through perforated pipes.  Some of the
   escaping insects, however, would escape into the general grain stores,
   reducing a great deal of the food to waste before the voyage was over.

Links:

References:

1. Fleay, David, 1958.  Flight of the platypus.
   _National Geographic_ 114 (Oct.): 512-525.

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-8-9
