BriefClaim: Insects survived on floating vegetation mats.
Title: Insects during the Flood
Keywords: ecology

Claim:

Insects and other invertebrates were not taken aboard the ark during
Noah's flood.  They survived on vegetation mats.

Source:

Woodmorappe, John, 1996.  _Noah's Ark: A Feasibility Study_, ICR, Santee,
 CA, p. 3.
GenesisFlood, p. 69.

Response:

1. Many insects could not survive for a year on vegetation mats.  Most
   insects are specialized at least somewhat for their food or
   environment.  Some of the requirements of various insects include
    - living vegetation or flowers to feed on
    - dry wood
    - soil
    - dung
    - animal corpses
    - shallow streams
   In particular, a global flood would have caused the extinction of most
   aphids, drywood termites, dung beetles, burying beetles, black flies,
   mayflies, ground beetles, and many more, unless special care were taken
   to ensure their survival.

2. A global flood would cause the extinction of millions of species of
   insects and other invertebrates simply as a result of the reduced
   quantity of habitat.  Insect species are going extinct today simply
   from the cutting down of sections of forests.  A global flood would be
   many orders of magnitude more devastating.  Given the fact that insects
   are alive today, if there was a flood, Noah must have gathered them and
   saved them with the rest of the animals.

3. The Bible says that Noah took "every creeping thing on the ground" and
   that these were distinct from animals (Gen. 6:20, 7:8,14).  It further
   says that all life that was not aboard the ark was killed, including
   creeping and swarming things (Gen. 7:21-23).  There is not the
   slightest bit of biblical support for anything living on vegetation
   mats and a great deal of biblical contradiction of the idea.
   Obviously, the only reason to put insects on mats is so the ark
   apologists do not have to worry about them.

Links:

References:

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-5-15
