BriefClaim: Animals' exacting needs could have evolved after the Flood.
Title: Animals' needs before and after Flood
Keywords: Noah's Ark, microevolution

Claim:

The specialized dietary needs of many animals might have come about only
after the Flood via microevolution.  Microevolution could also account for
climate preferences, lack of dormancy, wild temperament, and other traits,
meaning that Noah never would have had to face many of the challenges that
would be posed by animals in their present form.

Source:

Woodmorappe, John, 1996.  _Noah's Ark: A Feasibility Study_, Santee,
 CA: ICR, pp. 61, 116-117, 125, 134.

Response:

1. It is ironic that someone opposed to evolution would invoke evolution
   as a magic wand to solve so many problems.  The rates of evolution
   proposed by Woodmorappe are far greater than the evolution rates that
   biologists propose to account for common descent of all plants and
   animals from a common ancestor.

   Woodmorappe (1996, 5-7) further proposed that all species evolved after
   the Flood from representative genera or families aboard the ark.  Since
   the evolution Woodmorappe proposed involves speciation and has no
   barriers to change, it is unquestionably macroevolution, not
   microevolution.

2. Rapid evolution requires populations that include lots of variation
   already; the evolution then proceeds via selection of existing
   variation.  If there is little or no variation in the population
   already, nonharmful mutations must first occur to provide some
   variation, and evolution is much slower.  According to the Flood story,
   almost all populations would have begun from just two individuals,
   making variation virtually nil.  (Few populations would have had the
   capacity even to survive normal environmental fluctuations; Simberloff
   1988).  The populations would not have had the genetic variation to
   allow microevolution of specialized traits to be common.

Links:

References:

1. Simberloff, Daniel, 1988. The contribution of population and community
   biology to conservation science. _Annual Review of Ecology and
   Systematics_ 19: 473-511.

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-8-27
