BriefClaim: Pre-Flood animals lived in a uniform climate.
Title: Pre-flood animal ecology
Keywords: diversity, ecology, Eden, competitive exclusion, niche.

Claim:

The pre-Flood climate was uniform, allowing all animals to live not too
far from Noah.  There was no need for them to migrate across entire
continents.

Source:

Response:

1. Geological isolation allows diversity, and the lack of it causes
   species to go extinct.  Different regions with the same climate often
   have very different species (for example, polar bears in the Arctic and
   penguins in the Antarctic).  One of the leading causes of extinction
   today (perhaps *the* leading cause) is introduced species.  If even one
   species such as a goat, pig, or snake gets into a region where it
   did not used to live, it can cause extinctions -- either by
   out-competing the indigenous species for resources or by preying on the
   indigenous species directly.
    - The brown tree snake has caused the extinction of many native
      Pacific Island birds, including nine of the eleven native species on
      Guam.
    - A single introduced land snail species eliminated all the native
      snails of Tahiti.
   If all the species (or even "kinds") today were kept
   together, most of them would quickly go extinct.

2. Uniform climates do not support a wide variety of species.  You find
   different communities in tundra, temperate forest, tropical forest, and
   desert because of their different climates.  A single climate would
   rule out the biota from all other climates.

3. Whatever the climate was like, some species could not survive in it.
   Grylloblattids thrive in cold temperatures, and many species die in
   temperatures above 10 degrees C (Lloyd n.d.).  Temperatures that low
   would kill tree sloths.  Some cave species require 100 percent humidity.
   Other species would die from fungal and algal infections at humidities
   even close to that high.

4. All animals coming from a uniform climate strongly argues against
   creation.  Creationism argues that features of animals are designed;
   for example, that the camel's desert adaptations are designed for the
   desert, that the mountain goat's sure-footedness is designed for
   mountains.  (Evolution says much the same, but "designed" by natural
   selection.)  If all animals come from the same sort of climate, there
   is no need for such features, so it does not make sense that they are
   designed.

Links:

References:

1. Lloyd, Casandra, n.d.  Grylloblattodea.
   https://web.archive.org/web/20060302085921if_/http://www.discoverlife.org/nh/tx/Insecta/Orthoptera/Grylloblattodea/index.html


Further Reading:

Date: 2003-8-20
