BriefClaim: Aquatic organisms could have survived the Flood.
Title: Fish in the Flood
Keywords: Flood, deluge

Claim:

Present-day fish and other aquatic organisms could have survived the
Flood.  Many freshwater fish can survive in salt water, and many saltwater
fish can tolerate fresh water.  The floodwaters may have been layered by
salinity, allowing others to find their preferred habitat.

Source:

Woodmorappe, John, 1996.  _Noah's Ark: A Feasibility Study_. Santee, CA:
 Institute for Creation Research, pp. 140-152.

Response:

1. Layering of the floodwaters contradicts the Flood model, which proposes
   that the Flood was turbulent enough to stir up sediments on an
   incredible scale.  The model proposes that the floodwaters became the
   present oceans, so all the water flowing into the oceans would have
   ensured that they were well mixed.  The freshwater fish would have had
   no place to find fresh water.

2. The fact that many fish can tolerate wide ranges in salinity does not
   mean that all can.  Furthermore, the problem applies to more than
   fish.  Freshwater invertebrates are commonly used as indicators of the
   health of streams.  Even a tiny amount of pollution can cause many
   species to disappear from the stream.

3. Aquatic organisms would have more than salinity to worry about, such as
   the following:
    - Heat.  All mechanisms proposed to cause the Flood would have
      released enough heat to boil the oceans.  The deposition of
      limestone would release enough heat to boil them again.  Meteors and
      volcanoes that occurred during the Flood, as implied by their
      presence in layers attributed to the Flood by flood geologists,
      would probably have boiled them again (Isaak 1998). Woodmorappe
      (1996, 140) dismissed the problem of volcanoes but ignored all the
      other sources of heat.
    - Acid.  The volcanoes that erupted during the Flood would also have
      produced sulfuric acid, enough to lower the pH of the ocean to 2.2,
      which would be fatal to almost all marine life (Morton 1998b).
    - Substrate.  Many freshwater and marine invertebrates rely on a
      substrate.  They anchor themselves on the substrate and rely on
      currents to carry their food to them.  During the Flood, substrates
      would have been uninhabitable at least part of the time, especially
      on land.  Woodmorappe (1996, 141) suggested floating pumice as a
      substrate, but it would float with the currents, so currents would
      not bring nutrients to animals on them.
    - Pressure.  The Flood would have caused great fluctuation in sea
      pressures.  Many deep-sea creatures invariably die from the
      decompression when brought to the surface.  Other surface animals
      would die from too much pressure if forced deep underwater.

4. Woodmorappe predicted a sudden extinction of fish caused by the Flood.
   "[P]resent-day marine life is but an impoverished remnant of that which
   had originally been created and had existed before the Flood" (1996,
   142).  However, the actual pattern of extinction we see shows
   convincing disproof of the Flood.  Living genera become decreasingly
   represented in fossils as one goes deeper in the geological column,
   until there are no recent genera in the Triassic, and only about 12
   percent of recent genera have any fossil record.  Extinct genera
   continue back to the Cambrian (Morton 1998a).  This pattern exactly
   matches what one would expect from evolution.  It contradicts a global
   flood, which should include modern fish more-or-less uniformly
   throughout the flood-deposited sediments.

Links:

References:

1. Isaak, Mark, 1998.  Problems with a global flood, 2nd ed.
   http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/faq-noahs-ark.html
2. Morton, Glenn R., 1998a.  Fish cause problems for the global flood.
   https://web.archive.org/web/20120204012542if_/http://home.entouch.net/dmd/fish.htm
3. Morton, Glenn R., 1998b.  The global flood produces acidic flood waters.
   https://web.archive.org/web/20120204014032if_/http://home.entouch.net/dmd/acid.htm

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-6-29
