BriefClaim: Plants could have survived the Flood.
Title: Plant survival in the Flood
Keywords: plants, Flood, deluge, Noah's Ark

Claim:

All existing kinds of plants could have survived Noah's Flood.

Source:

Woodmorappe, John, 1996.  _Noah's Ark: A Feasibility Study_. Santee, CA:
 Institute for Creation Research, pp. 153-162.

Response:

1. Not all plants could survive the Flood for some of the following
   reasons:
    - Many plants (seeds and all) would be killed if soaked for several
      months in water, especially salt water.
    - Some plants do not produce seeds; they would have been killed when
      the Flood either uprooted or covered them.
    - Not all seeds could survive a year before germinating 
      (Benzing 1990; Densmore and Zasada 1983; Garwood 1989).

2. The Flood was an ecological catastrophe.  Creationists credit it with
   eroding and redepositing sediments miles thick, raising mountains,
   carving immense canyons, and even repositioning continents.  This alone
   would doom many plants to extinction, even if they or their seeds
   survived the Flood, for some of the following reasons:
    - Most of the world's seeds would have been buried under many feet --
      even miles -- of sediment.  This would keep them from sprouting.
    - Many plants require particular soil conditions to grow.  The Flood
      would have eroded away all the topsoil which provides the optimum
      conditions for most plants.
    - Some seeds will germinate only after being exposed to fire.  After
      the Flood, there was nothing to burn.
    - Most flowering plants are pollinated by insects, but the only
      insects around after the Flood would have been those Noah carried
      aboard the ark.  The surviving seeds would have had to find the
      proper conditions of soil type and burial depth in a small area
      around where the ark landed.
    - Plants live not as individuals, but as communities.  If you cut
      down the redwoods, you kill not only the redwoods but also dozens of
      other plants that depend on the community structure.  After the
      Flood, there would have been no ecological communities, only bare
      land.  Any plant that depends on a mature community (for shade,
      shelter, humidity, or support, for example) could not survive until
      such a community matures, which usually takes years to decades.

   Woodmorappe (throughout his book, not just regarding plants) made two
   fundamental errors:
    a. He noted that "many" could survive the flood conditions,
       disregarding the significant number that could not, but that are
       alive anyway.
    b. He assumed that plants and animals could live in isolation,
       ignoring that life lives in, and depends upon, ecologies.  Simply
       preserving plants and animals would keep them alive for a very short
       time.  Noah would have had to rebuild many entire ecologies to
       maintain the life we see today.

3. Evolution predicts the geographical distribution of plant kinds that we
   observe, with many species occurring on one continent and not others.
   Flood geology predicts that this pattern would not occur.  Flood theory
   fails.

Links:

References:

1. Benzing, D. H., 1990.  _Vascular Epiphytes_. Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
2. Densmore, R. and J. Zasada, 1983.  Seed dispersal and dormancy patterns
   in northern willows: ecological and evolutionary significance.
   _Canadian Journal of Botany_ 61: 3207-3216.
3. Garwood, N. C., 1989. Tropical soil seed banks: a review. pp. 149-209
   In: Leck, M. A., V. T. Parker, and R. L. Simpson (eds.), _Ecology of
   Soil Seed Banks_, San Diego: Academic Press.

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-8-3
