BriefClaim: Fossils are sorted by the ability to escape.
Title: Fossil sorting by fleeing
Keywords: fossil record, Noah's flood

Claim:

The order of fossils in the fossil record is explained by the animals'
ability to escape the rising floodwaters.  Slow animals, such as clams,
are found low in the fossil record, while quicker animals, such as mammals
and birds, appear higher.

Source:

SciCre, p. 119.

Response:

1. Fossils are not sorted according to their ability to escape rising
   floodwaters.  If they were, we would expect to see slow-moving species
   like sloths and tortoises and every low-elevation plant at the bottom
   of the fossil record, while fast-moving species, such as velociraptors,
   pterosaurs, and giant dragonflies, would be at the top.  But this is
   nothing like what we actually observe; in many cases we find just the
   opposite.  For example, in undisturbed strata there has not
   been a single sloth fossil found below even the highest velociraptor
   remains, and flowering plants do not appear in the fossil record until
   after winged insects and reptiles.

2. Even common present-day floods trap all manner of people and animals.
   The violence of a flood that could cover the entire earth in forty days
   would be bound to trap many individuals from even fast-moving species,
   especially those that were old and infirm, crippled, or trapped in
   low-lying areas.  Therefore, we would expect to find the occasional
   member of fast-moving species near the bottom of the fossil record.
   However, the vast majority of fossilized species are only found within
   certain relatively narrow ranges within the fossil record.  For
   example, human fossils are only found at the very top of the fossil
   record (Pleistocene period and later), and tyrannosaurs are only found
   at the end of the Cretaceous period.

3. The fossil record preserves entire ecosystems, not just individual
   species.  Fossils of one species are found in association with fossils
   of other species common to their ecosystem.  If fossil distribution is
   dependent on the ability to escape rising floodwaters, then all the
   species within an ecosystem must be equally capable of escape for them
   to be preserved together.  But since these associated species include
   both highly motile animals and completely nonmotile plants, this is
   obviously not the case.

Links:

References:

Further Reading:

Cuffey, Clifford A., 2001.  The fossil record: Evolution or "scientific
 creation".  https://web.archive.org/web/20071011235218if_/http://www.gcssepm.org/special/cuffey_00.htm or
 https://web.archive.org/web/20020311125317if_/http://www.nogs.org/cuffeyart.html

Date: 2003-6-9
