BriefClaim: Dinosaur figurines from Acambaro show a human-dinosaur association.
Title: Acambaro dinosaur figurines
Keywords: Acambaro

Claim:

Thousands of clay and stone figurines discovered in Acambaro, Mexico,
include figurines of dinosaurs.  They are apparently from the preclassical
Chupicuaro Culture (800 B.C.E. to 200 C.E.).  Radiocarbon and
thermoluminescent dating gives them even older ages.  These figurines show
that the ancient people were familiar with dinosaurs.

Source:

Swift, Dennis et al., n.d.  The dinosaur figurines of Acambaro, Mexico.
 http://www.bible.ca/tracks/tracks-acambaro.htm
Berlitz, Charles, 1984.  _Atlantis, the Eighth
 Continent_.  New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, pp. 181-182.

Response:

1. The figurines show every evidence of being recent folk art,
   fraudulently buried in an archeological excavation.  De Peso (1953)
   made the following observations:

    - The surfaces of the figurines were new.  They were not marred by a
      patina or coating of soluble salts characteristic of genuinely old
      artifacts from the same area. The owner said none of the figures had
      been washed in acid.  Edges of depressions were sharp and new.  No
      dirt was packed into crevices.

    - Genuine archeological relics of fragile items are almost always
      found in fragments.  Finding more than 30,000 such items in pristine
      condition is unheard of. The excavators of the artifacts were
      "neither careful nor experienced" in their field technique, yet no
      marks of their shovels, mattocks, or picks were noted in any of the
      32,000 specimens. Some figurines were broken, but the breaks were
      unworn and apparently deliberate to suggest age. No parts were
      missing.

    - "The author spent two days watching the excavators burrow and dig;
      during the course of their search they managed to break a number of
      authentic prehistoric objects. On the second day the two struck a
      cache and the author examined the material _in situ_. The cache had
      been very recently buried by digging a down sloping tunnel into the
      black fill dirt of the prehistoric room. This fill ran to a depth
      of approximately 1.30 m. Within the stratum there were authentic
      Tarascan sherds, obsidian blades, tripod metates, manos, etc., but
      these objects held no concern for the excavators. In burying the
      cache of figurines, the natives had unwittingly cut some 15
      cms. below the black fill into the sterile red earth floor of the
      prehistoric room. In back-filling the tunnel they mixed this red
      sterile earth with black earth; the tracing of their original
      excavation was, as a result, a simple task" (Di Peso 1953, 388).

    - Fresh manure was found in the tunnel fill.

    - Fingerprints were found in freshly packed earth that filled an
      excavated bowl.

2. The story of their discovery gives a motive for fraud.  Waldemar
   Julsrud, who hired workers to excavate a Chupicuaro site in 1945, paid
   workers a peso apiece for intact figurines.  It very well may have been
   more economical for the workers to make figurines than to discover and
   excavate them.  Given the quantity that he received, the contribution
   to the peasants' economy would have been substantial.

3. The figurines are not from the Chupicuaro.  They came from within a
   single-component Tarascan ruin.  The Tarascan are post-classical and
   historical, emerging between 900 and 1522 C.E.

4. If authentic, the figurines imply even more archeological anomalies:
    - If the figurines really were based on actual dinosaurs, why have no
      dinosaur fossils been found in the Acambaro region?
    - Why did no other Mexican cultures record any dinosaurs?
    - What caused the dinosaurs to disappear in the last 1,100 years?

5. There is no credible information to support the claims.  The only
   sources are pseudoscience journalists, creationists, and crackpots, who
   have obvious ulterior motives for gullibility.  Their own dating
   results are discordant with each other and with the ages of the
   native cultures, and even attempting to do carbon dating on
   the inorganic figurines shows their incompetence.

Links:

#https://web.archive.org/web/20040703081105if_/http://www.thehallofmaat.com/maat/read.php?f=1&i=135566&t=135175

References:

1. Di Peso, Charles C., 1953.  (see below)

Further Reading:

Di Peso, Charles C., 1953.  The clay figurines of Acambaro, Guanajuato,
 Mexico.  _American Antiquity_ 18(4): 388-389.

Date: 2003-7-27, 2004-4-29
