BriefClaim: Relativity shows geocentrism is true.
Title: Relative geocentrism
Keywords: geocentrism, relativity

Claim:

Relativity states that there is no favored frame of reference, so a
geocentric frame is as good as a heliocentric one.

 "We know that the difference between a heliocentric theory and a
  geocentric theory is one of relative motion only, and that such a
  difference has no physical significance (Hoyle 1975, cited in
  Willis 2000, 2).

Source:

Willis, Tom, 2000.  "The Laws of Cause and Effect, and the 1st
 and 2nd Laws of Thermodynamics have been invalidated by modern science",
 Part 2.  _CSA News_ 17(2) (Mar/Apr): 1-2.

Response:

1. The fact that different frames of reference all work does not mean that
   one frame makes as much sense as any other in any application.  For
   navigating city streets, a geocentric frame makes sense; we would not
   want constantly to recalculate our position relative to the sun.  For
   considering the solar system as a whole, however, a heliocentric frame
   makes sense.  Figuring the calculations of the rest of the universe
   spinning and wobbling around the earth would be possible in theory, but
   prohibitive in practice.

   Another frame of reference and mathematical transformations put the
   universe on the inside of a hollow earth.  That model is mathematically
   equivalent to standard cosmology (S. Morris 1983).  If physical
   significance is the only criterion, it is just as good as a
   heliocentric frame, too.

2. The claim cuts both ways.  It also says that heliocentrism is just as
   good as geocentrism, as is the frame of reference relative to any other
   planet around any other star.  It says that geocentrism is correct only
   if you choose to interpret it that way.  Some people may want to
   interpret it that way, but they cannot then claim that others are
   wrong.  The earth still moves.

Links:

References:

2. Hoyle, F., 1975.  _Astronomy and Cosmology - A Modern Course_.  San
   Francisco: W.H. Freeman & Co.
#   What Willis quotes is from p. 416 of Hoyle.
2. Morris, Scot, 1983. The hollow earth: a maddening theory that can't be
   disproved. _Omni_ 5(11) (Aug.): 128-129.

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-6-11
