BriefClaim: Design is detectable.
Title: Intelligent Design
Keywords: design, designer, jury-rigged, intelligent, watchmaker, complexity.

Claim:

Life looks intelligently designed because of its complexity and
arrangement.  As a watch implies a watchmaker, so life requires a
designer.

Source:

Cicero, Marcus Tullius. 1896 (45 B.C.).  _De Natura Deorum (On the Nature
 of the Gods)_, transl. Francis Brooks.  London: Methuen; Book 2,
 chap. 34.
 https://web.archive.org/web/20090106030504if_/http://oll.libertyfund.org/Texts/Cicero0070/NatureOfGods/HTMLs/0040_Pt03_Book2.html#hd_lf040.label.159
Paley, William, 1802.  _Natural Theology: or, Evidences of the Existence
 and Attributes of the Deity_.  London: J. Faulder.
Davis, Percival and Dean H. Kenyon, 1989.  _Of Pandas and People: The
 Central Question of Biological Origins_ (2nd ed.).  Dallas, TX: Haughton.

Response:

1. According to the definition of design, we must determine something
   about the design process in order to infer design.  We do this by
   observing the design in process or by comparing with the results of
   known designs.  The only example of known intelligent design we have is
   human design.  Life does not look man-made.

2. Nobody argues that life is not complicated.  However, complexity is not
   the same as design.  There are simple things that are designed and
   complex things that originate naturally.  Complexity does not imply
   design; in fact, simplicity is a design goal in most designs.

3. In most cases, the inference of design is made because people cannot
   envision an alternative.  This is simply the <CA100>argument from
   incredulity>.  Historically, supernatural design has been attributed to
   lots of things that we now know form naturally, such as lightning,
   rainbows, and seasons.

4. Life as a whole looks very undesigned by human standards, for several
   reasons:

   - In known design, innovations that occur in one product quickly get
     incorporated into other, often very different, products.  In
     eukaryotic life, innovations generally stay confined in one lineage.
     When the same sort of innovation occurs in different lineages (such
     as webs of spiders, caterpillars, and web spinners), the details of
     their implementation differ in the different lineages.  When one
     traces lineages, one sees a great difference between life and
     design.  (Eldredge has done this, comparing trilobites and cornets;
     Walker 2003.)

   - In design, form typically follows function.  Some creationists expect
     this (Morris 1974).  Yet life shows many examples of different forms
     with the same function (e.g., different structures making up the
     wings of birds, bats, insects, and pterodactyls; different organs for
     making webs in spiders, caterpillars, and web spinners; and at least
     eleven different types of insect ears), the same basic form with
     different functions (e.g., the same pattern of bones in a human hand,
     whale flipper, dog paw, and bat wing) and some structures and even
     entire organisms without apparent function (e.g., some vestigial
     organs, creatures living isolated in inaccessible caves and deep
     underground).

   - As noted above, life is complex.  Design aims for simplicity.

   - For almost all designed objects, the manufacture of the object is
     separate from any function of the object itself.  All living objects
     reproduce themselves.

   - Life lacks plan.  There are no specifications of living structures
     and processes.  Genes do not fully describe the phenotype of an
     organism.  Sometimes in the absence of genes, structure results
     anyway.  Organisms, unlike designed systems, are self-constructing in
     an environmental context.

   - Life is wasteful.  Most organisms do not reproduce, and most
     fertilized zygotes die before growing much.  A designed process would
     be expected to minimize this waste.

   - Life includes many examples of systems that are jury-rigged out of
     parts that were used for another purpose.  These are what we would
     expect from evolution, not from an intelligent designer.  For
     example:
      - Vertebrate eyes have a blind spot because the retinal nerves are in
        front of the photoreceptors.
      - On orchids that provide a platform for pollinating insects to land
        on, the stem of the flower has a half twist to move the platform to
        the lower side of the flower.

   - Life is highly variable.  In almost every species, there is a spread
     of values for anything you care to measure.  The "information" that
     specifies life is of very low tolerance in engineering terms.  There
     are few standards.

5. Life is nasty.  If life is designed, then death, <CH321>disease>, and
   decay also must be designed since they are integral parts of life.
   This is a standard problem of apologetics.  Of course, many designed
   things are also nasty (think of certain weapons), but if the designer
   is supposed to have moral standards, then it is added support against
   the design hypothesis.

6. The process of evolution can be considered a design process, and the
   complexity and arrangement we see in life are much closer to what we
   would expect from evolution than from known examples of intelligent
   design.  Indeed, engineers now use essentially the same processes as
   evolution to find solutions to problems that would be intractably
   complex otherwise.

7. Does evolution itself look designed?  When you consider that some sort
   of adaptive mechanism would be necessary on the changing earth if life
   were to survive, then if life were designed, evolution or something
   like it would have to be designed into it.

8. Claiming to be able to recognize design in life implies that nonlife
   is different, that is, not designed.  To claim that life is
   recognizably designed is to claim that an intelligent designer did not
   create the rest of the universe.

9. As it stands, the design claim makes no predictions, so it is
   unscientific and useless.  It has generated no research at all.


Links:

References:

1. SciCre, pg. 70.
2. Walker, Gabrielle, 2003.  The collector.  _New Scientist_
   179(2405) (26 July): 38-41. 

Further Reading:

Aulie, Richard P., 1998.  A reader's guide to _Of Pandas and People_
 https://web.archive.org/web/20231208232047if_/http://www.nabt.org/sub/evolution/panda1.asp

Isaak, Mark, 2003.  What design looks like.  RNCSE 23(5-6): 25-26,31-35.

Miller, Kenneth R., n.d.  Of pandas and people: A brief critique.
 http://www.kcfs.org/pandas.html

Pennock, Robert T., 1999.  _Tower of Babel_.  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Perakh, Mark, 2003.  _Unintelligent Design_.  Amherst, NY: Prometheus.

Date: 2003-5-13, 2004-4-3
