BriefClaim: Specified information criterion produces no false positives.
Title: False positives of complexity-specification
Keywords: Complex specified information, explanatory filter

Claim:

<CI110>Specified complexity> is a reliable criterion for detecting design.
The complexity-specification criterion successfully avoids false positives
-- in other words, whenever it attributes design, it does so correctly.

Source:

Dembski, William A., 2002.  _No Free Lunch_, Lanham, MD: Rowman &
 Littlefield, pp. 24-25.

Response:

1. Complexity-specification allows false positives because it does not
   consider the combination of regularity and chance acting together, and
   it does not consider unknown causes.

2. Specific examples of false positives are <CB200>irreducibly complex>
   structures for which plausible evolutionary origins have been found.

   Another false positive is canals on Mars.  Percival Lowell saw that
   many Martian canals meet at each of several points. The odds of this
   happening by chance, he calculated, are less than 1 in 1.6 &times;
   10^260, proving that Mars must be inhabited (Lowell, 1907). We now know
   that the canals were optical illusions caused by the human mind
   connecting indistinct features.

3. Dembski himself admitted the possibility of error in the same book
   in which he claimed reliability:

    "Now it can happen that we may not know enough to determine
     all the relevant chance hypotheses.  Alternatively, we might think we
     know the relevant chance hypotheses, but later discover that we
     missed a crucial one.  In the one case a design inference could not
     even get going; in the other, it would be mistaken.  But these are
     the risks of empirical inquiry, which of its nature is fallible.
     Worse by far is to impose as an _a priori_ requirement that all gaps
     in our knowledge must ultimately be filled by non-intelligent causes.
     (Dembski 2002, 123)

   What Dembski fails to appreciate is that his complexity-specification
   criterion imposes an a priori requirement that all gaps must be
   filled by supernatural causes.

   Dembski also said, "On the other hand, if things end up in the net that
   are not designed, the criterion will be useless" (Dembski 1999, 142).

Links:

References:

1. Dembski, William A., 1999.  _Intelligent Design: The bridge between
   science and theology_.  Downers Grove, Ill.: InterVarsity Press.
2. Dembski, William A., 2002.  (see above)
3. Lowell, Percival (as "A Mathematician"), October 26, 1907.  The evidence
   of life on Mars: A simple mathematical proof that the canals  are not
   due to natural causes.  _Scientific American_, reprinted at Becker,
   Barbara J., 2003. History 135C: Exploring the Cosmos,
   http://eee.uci.edu/clients/bjbecker/ExploringtheCosmos/week10b.html


Further Reading:

Ratzsch, Del, 2001. _Nature, Design and Science_. Albany: State University
 of New York Press.  (The appendix addresses false positives and other
 problems with Dembski's explanatory filter.)

Date: 2003-7-8
