BriefClaim: Purpose indicates design.
Title: Purpose and design
Keywords: purpose

Claim:

A purpose for an object indicates that the object is designed.

Source:

Paley, William, 1802.  _Natural Theology: or, Evidences of the Existence
 and Attributes of the Deity_.  London: J. Faulder, p. 2.

Response:

1. When somebody designs something, he or she usually has a purpose for
   it, but the purpose is that of the designer, not the object designed.
   For example, people have a purpose for windows and airbags in
   automobiles, but the automobile itself has no such purpose.  When the
   purpose argument is applied to life, though, the designer is
   intentionally left entirely unknowable, and thus the purpose of the
   designer is not part of the picture.  We know only the object's purpose
   for part of the object, which is not relevant unless you want to claim
   that the object designed itself.

2. To the extent that traits of living things have a purpose, that
   purpose, ultimately, is the reproductive success of the organism's
   genes.  Such purpose is entirely consistent with evolution.

3. It is not uncommon for undesigned objects to have a purpose.  The North
   Star, for example, has a purpose in navigation, but it got that purpose
   entirely through the chance of its being in a certain spot.

   Even with designed things, it is common for purposes to come and go.
   The same object can have different purposes at different times or even
   multiple purposes at the same time.  It will gain and lose its purposes
   as conditions change.

4. Some life forms have no apparent purpose.  There have been species
   in isolated caves discovered quite by chance (Decu et al. 1994).  Very
   likely, there have been species similarly isolated that were never
   discovered.

   Some parts of life forms also appear to have no purpose: <CB130>junk
   DNA>, for example.

   Life also exists at cross-purposes.  A bobcat's purpose for a rabbit is
   likely to be quite different from the rabbit's purpose.

Links:

References:

1. Decu, V., M. Gruia, S. L. Keffer and S. M. Sarbu, 1994.  Stygobiotic
   waterscorpion, _Nepa anophthalma_, n. sp. (Heteroptera: Nepidae), from
   a sulfurous cave in Romania.  _Annals of the Entomological Society of
   America_ 87: 755-761.

Further Reading:

Date: 2003-6-23, 2003-10-6
