BriefClaim: Every machine's origin, where determinable, is by intelligent agency.
Title: Origins of machines
Keywords: machine, intelligent design

Claim:

In every case where a machine's origin can be determined, it is the result
of intelligent agency.  (A machine is a device for transmitting or
modifying force or energy.)  Out of billions of observations, there are no
exceptions.  It should be considered a law of nature that machines,
including those in living organisms, have an intelligent cause.

#A machine is any mechanical or organic device that transmits or modifies
#energy to perform or assist in the performance of tasks. [Wikipedia]

Source:

Scot, Dave.  2006.  Machines are the result of intelligent agency.
 http://www.uncommondescent.com/index.php/archives/778

Response:

1. The claim is an argument by analogy: Life is like man-made objects in
   containing machines, therefore it is like man-made objects in having an
   intelligent cause.  It suffers the weaknesses of all arguments by
   analogy.  In particular, it ignores <CI100>dissimilarities> between
   life and design, and the similarity has questionable relevance to
   intelligence.

   If the argument were valid, it could equally be argued that, in every
   case where a machine's origin can be determined, the machine is made by
   humans, and therefore all life is man-made.

2. Many machines occur in nature without the involvement of intelligence
   or, indeed, of any kind of life.  The following list is far from
   exhaustive.

    - Inclined planes, perhaps the simplest type of machine, are
      ubiquitous on earth.  Functions include causing waves to break and
      making it easier for animals to climb heights.
    - Ice wedges, another form of wedge, contribute significantly to
      erosion.
    - Molecular bonds function as springs as they transmit and distribute
      forces through materials.
    - Thunder clouds generate electrical forces.
    - The earth as a whole is a dynamo, converting mechanical motion of
      convection into a magnetic field.
    - Geysers produce eruptions which are predictable and fairly regular.
      If Paley's watch can be considered a machine, surely Yellowstone's
      Old Faithful is a machine, too, but I have never heard any
      suggestion that it is designed.

3. Other machines are created by life but not by intelligence.  Genetic
   algorithms design or help to design many kinds of machines, from
   antennae to jet engines (Marczyk 2004).  One may attempt to argue that
   items designed by a genetic algorithm inherit the intelligent agency of
   the algorithm's designer, but this misses the point that no human
   mental activity directs the immediate operation of the algorithm.  In
   some cases, for example in some electronic circuits, the
   algorithmically-designed results show no resemblance to their
   human-designed versions, and indeed, cannot be explained via human
   design methods (Koza et al. 2003).

   Unintelligent animals also create a wide variety of machines, such as
   the orb weaver's spider webs, the ant lion's pit traps, and
   air-conditioned termite nests.  Again, one may appeal that the designer
   of the designer might be intelligent, but that raises the possibility
   that maybe intelligence starts with the designer of the designer of the
   designer, or even further back.

Links:

Camp, Robert. 2005.  Very like a . . . machine?
 https://web.archive.org/web/20170401124036if_/http://www.csicop.org/intelligentdesignwatch/analogy.html

References:

1. Koza, John R., Martin A. Keane and Matthew J. Streeter, 2003.
   Evolving inventions.  SciAm 288(2) (Feb.): 52-59.
2. Marczyk, Adam. 2004.  Genetic algorithms and evolutionary computation.
   http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/genalg/genalg.html

Further Reading:

#Acknowledgement: Steve Story suggested the claim and gave the source.
#Acknowledgement: Bobby D. Bryant for "life is man-made" argument.

Date: 2006-2-8
